---
title: 04 Case Morphology 格形态
---

## 4.0 格形态 {#Sec4}

Anyone who has studied German, Latin, Russian, Classical Greek or Sanskrit, is familiar with the concept of Case. Case generally refers to a morphological scheme in which a noun, whether via internal mutation of its phonemes or via affixes, shows what grammatical “role” it plays in the phrase or sentence in which it appears. For example, in the English sentence *It was me she saw* , the use of the word ‘she’ as opposed to ‘her’ and the use of ‘me’ as opposed to ‘I’ distinguishes the subject of the sentence (the person seeing) from the object of the verb (the one being seen). Similarly, in the German sentence *Der Bruder des Knaben sah den Mann* (= ‘The boy’s brother saw the man’), the words ‘der’, ‘des’ and ‘den’ distinguish the subject of the sentence ‘brother’ (nominative case) from the possessor ‘boy’ (genitive case) from the object ‘man’ (accusative case).

The concept of “case” can extend far beyond the notions of subject, object and possessor. Depending on the particular language, there may be noun cases which specify the location or position of a noun, whether a noun accompanies another or derives from another or is the recipient of another. In general, noun cases in those languages which rely upon them often substitute for what in English is accomplished using prepositions or prepositional phrases.

There are 68 cases in New Ithkuil, each marked on a formative by a vocalic affix in Slot IX. The individual cases are described below in Sections 4.2 through 4.9. However, before doing so, it will be helpful to first discuss the relationship between case and *semantic role* , as well as the notion of *argument structure* .

## 4.1 Semantic Role versus Positional Slot {#Sec4_1}

In most languages, case operates at the surface structure level of language to signify arbitrary grammatical relations such as subject, direct object, indirect object. The deeper level of “semantic role” is ignored in terms of morphological designations. The notion of semantic role can be illustrated by the following set of sentences:

(1a) *John opened the door with the key.*
(1b) *The key opened the door.*
(1c) *The wind opened the door.*
(1d) *The door opened.*

In each of these sentences case is assigned based on “slot”, i.e., the position of the nouns relative to the verb, irrespective of their semantic roles. Thus the “subjects” of the sentences are, respectively, *John* , *the key* , *the wind* , and *the door* . Yet it can be seen that, semantically speaking, these four sentences are interrelated in a causal way. Specifically, Sentence (1b) results directly from sentence (1a), and sentence (1d) results directly from either (1b) or (1c). We see that the case of the noun ‘key’ in sentence (1a) is prepositional, while in sentence (1b) it is the subject. Yet, the key plays the same semantic role in both sentences: the physical instrument by which the act of opening is accomplished. As for the noun ‘door,’ it is marked as a direct object in the first three sentences and as a subject in the fourth, even though its semantic role in all four sentences never changes, i.e., it is the noun which undergoes a change in its state as a result of the act of opening. The noun ‘John’ in sentence (1a) is marked as a subject, the same case as ‘key’ in (1b), the ‘wind’ in (1c) and the ‘door’ in (1d), yet the semantic role of ‘John’ is entirely different than the role of ‘key’ in (1b) and different again from ‘door’ in (1c), i.e., John is acting as the conscious, deliberate initiator of the act of opening. Finally, the noun ‘wind’ in (1c), while marked as a subject, operates in yet another semantic role distinct from the subjects of the other sentences, i.e., an inanimate, blind force of nature which, while being the underlying cause of the act of opening, can make no conscious or willed choice to initiate such action.

### 4.1.1 Case as Indicator of Semantic Role {#Sec4_1_1}

The case structures of Western languages mark positional slot (i.e., grammatical relations) only, and have no overt way to indicate semantic role, thus providing no way of showing the intuitive causal relationship between sets of sentences like those above. In New Ithkuil, however, the case of a noun is based on its underlying semantic role, not its syntactic position in the sentence relative to the verb. These semantic roles reflect a more fundamental or primary level of language irrespective of the surface case marking of nouns in other languages. Thus New Ithkuil noun declension more accurately reflects the underlying semantic function of nouns in sentences.

The following semantic roles are marked by noun cases in New Ithkuil. They correspond roughly to the “subjects” and “objects” of Western languages:

**AGENT** : The animate, (and usually conscious and deliberate) initiator of an act which results in another noun undergoing a consequent change in state or behavior, e.g., ‘John’ in Sentence (1a) above.

**FORCE** : An inanimate, unwilled cause of an act such as a force of nature like ‘wind’ in Sentence (1c) above.

**INSTRUMENT** : The noun which functions as the physical means or tool by which an act is initiated or performed, e.g., ‘key’ in Sentences (1a) and (1b) above.

**PATIENT** : The noun which undergoes a change in state or behavior as a result of an act initiated or caused by itself or by another noun, e.g., ‘door’ in all four sentences above.

### 4.1.2 Additional Semantic Roles {#Sec4_1_2}

Additional semantic roles corresponding to subjects and objects in Western languages exist in New Ithkuil as overt noun cases. These include the roles of ENABLER, EXPERIENCER, STIMULUS, RECIPIENT, and CONTENT, and are explained below using the following set of sentences as illustrations.

(2a) *Mary hits the children.*
(2b) *Mary entertains the children.*
(2c) *Mary sees the children.*
(2d) *Mary tells the children a story.*
(2e) *Mary wants children.*

Examining these five sentences, we notice that the noun Mary is in the subject slot in all of them and the children is the direct object (except in the fourth sentence), even though the semantic roles of both nouns are entirely different in each of these five sentences. Beginning with Sentence (2a) we see that Mary is an AGENT which tangibly causes injury or pain to the children who obviously function in the role of PATIENT. Thus (2a) is identical to sentence (1a) in terms of the roles portrayed by the subject and direct object.

In Sentence (2b) however, *Mary entertains the children* , there is a subtle distinction. At first we might consider Mary an agent who initiates a change in the children (i.e., the fact that they become entertained). But, in fact, the act of entertainment is not one whose result (enjoyment by the audience) can be guaranteed by the party doing the entertaining. In fact, the result of the act of entertainment is not Mary’s to determine, but rather the children’s, based on whether they “feel” a sense of enjoyment at experiencing Mary’s act. And so, Mary is more like a patient here, not an agent, as she is undergoing a change in her state or behavior (she is performing an attempt to entertain) which she herself has chosen to initiate and undergo, yet the act has the potential to cause a resulting change in the children, the success of this motivation to be determined by the children, however, not Mary. Such a semantic role as Mary here is termed an ENABLER. And how do the children make the decision as to whether they are entertained or not (i.e., what is their semantic role?). Can the children deliberately or consciously choose to feel a sense of enjoyment, or are they not themselves unwilling “patients” to their own emotional reactions? In case grammar, a party such as the children who undergo an unwilled experience is termed an EXPERIENCER. Besides emotional reactions, such unwilled experiences include autonomic sensory perceptions (e.g., parties that see or hear because their eyes were open and pointed in a particular direction or who were within earshot of a sound), and autonomic bodily reactions or responses as well as proprioceptive sensations (e.g., coughing, sneezing, perspiring, feeling hot or cold, feeling pain, etc.).

This notion of EXPERIENCER is likewise illustrated by Sentence (2c) *Mary sees the children* , in which the verb ‘see’ denotes an automatic sensory experience, not a deliberately initiated action. In other words, it is the nature of the sense of sight to function automatically whenever a person is conscious and his/her eyes are open. The verb ‘see’ does not necessarily imply a conscious or deliberately willed action of “seeing” (as would be implied by the verb ‘to look [at]’). Therefore, the “action” is automatic and uninitiated; it is, in fact, not an action at all, but rather an experiential state which the person doing the seeing undergoes. In other words, the person seeing is actually a kind of “patient,” as it is he/she who undergoes the experience of (and physical or emotional reaction to) the particular sight. Such undergoers of sensory verbs and other unwilled states (e.g., emotional states or reactions, autonomic bodily reactions such as sneezing, physical states of sensation such as being hot or cold, etc.) are categorized in the role of EXPERIENCER. And what of the children’s role in sentence (2c)? Unlike the first three sentences, the children do not undergo any action. Certainly the process of “being seen” by Mary does not in itself cause a physical change or reaction of any kind in the entity being seen. Nor can the children be analyzed as “initiating” the act of sight, as they may be completely unaware that Mary is seeing them. As a result, the children’s semantic role is merely that of STIMULUS, a neutral, unwitting originating reason for the experiential state being undergone by the other noun participant.

In Sentence (2d) *Mary tells the children a story* , Mary is a patient who initiates the action which she herself undergoes, the telling of a story. The children do not undergo an unwilled emotional, sensory, or bodily reaction here, but rather are the passive and more or less willing RECIPIENT of information, the role of an “indirect object” in Western languages. The story, on the other hand, is merely a non-participatory abstract referent, whose role is termed CONTENT.

The role of CONTENT also applies to the children in Sentence (2e) *Mary wants children* , where they function as the “object” of Mary’s desire. Since no tangible action is occurring, nor are the children undergoing any result of change of state, nor need they be even aware of Mary’s desire, they are, like the story in sentence (2d), merely non-participatory referents. As for Mary’s role in (2e), the emotional state of desire, being unwilled, self-activating, and subjectively internal, creates a situation similar to an automatic sensory perception or autonomic body response; thus, Mary’s role is again that of EXPERIENCER.

### 4.1.3 Argument Structure {#Sec4_1_3}

In addition to case being based on semantic roles, New Ithkuil differs in another important respect from natural languages in that it does not have a default argument structure for its verbal formatives. This is explained below.

The individual verbs of natural languages each have an implied argument structure, i.e., a pattern of how nouns (i.e., “arguments”) interact with the particular verb and what formal role (from a morpho-semantic perspective) each of those nouns plays in relation to the verb. For example, the verb ‘hit’ in English implies the existence of an agent (i.e., someone doing the hitting) and a patient (i.e., someone undergoing the effect/result of the hitting), as in ‘He hit the dog.’ A different argument structure is illustrated by the verb ‘give’ which implies an agent doing the giving, a patient undergoing the receiving, and a noun functioning in the semantic role of content, i.e., the item being given/received.

The grammar of natural languages specifies the requirements of which arguments to a verb must be present for a sentence to be grammatical and which arguments are optional. This is illustrated, for example, in the following English sentences (ungrammatical sentences are preceded by an asterisk):

3a) *Sam gave the girl a book* .

3b) *Sam gave a book* .

3c) *Sam gave* .

3d) * *Sam gave the girl* . (Intended meaning: *Sam gave something to the girl.* )

3e) * *Gave the girl a book* . (Intended meaning: *The girl was given a book* .)

3f) * *Gave the girl* . (Intended meaning: *The girl was given something* .)

3g) * *Gave a book* . (Intended meaning: *Someone gave a book* .)

3h) * *Gave* . (Intended meaning: *Someone did some giving* , or *Giving occurred* ).

In sentence (3a), all three arguments to the verb ‘gave’ are expressed, while in sentence (3b) the patient/recipient has been deleted. Sentence (3c) deletes both the patient/recipient and the CONTENT argument. In sentence (3d) however, when we try to delete the CONTENT argument of book while preserving the patient/recipient, the sentence requires syntactic restructuring into S*am gave [something] to the girl* in order to remain grammatical (the asterisk * in front of the sentence indicates it is ungrammatical). Likewise, sentences (3e), (3f), (3g) and (3h) are ungrammatical when we try to delete the agent, as well as either or both of the other two arguments as well, requiring paraphrasing to make the intended meaning grammatical).

Compare the above group of sentences containing the verb ‘gave’ with the sentences below featuring the verb ‘broke’:

4a) *Tim broke the window with a hammer* .
4b) *Tim broke the window* .
4c) *The hammer broke the window* .
4d) *The window broke* .
4e) ** The hammer broke* . (Intended meaning: *The hammer broke something* .)
4f) ** Tim broke* . (Intended meaning: *Tim broke something* , or *Tim did some breaking* .)

Notice how sentence (3c) above, *Sam gave* , is grammatical, but the similarly structured sentence (4f) *Tim broke* is not. Conversely, notice in comparing sentences (4a) and (4d) that the patient *window* is grammatical in both object and subject slots, but similarly placing the patient *girl* from sentence (3a) into subject slot gives the ungrammatical sentence **The girl gave* (with intended meaning: *The girl was given something* or *Someone gave the girl something* .)

Other examples of constraints on argument structure in English are illustrated as follows:

*‘Bill cut the cake with a knife’* can be shortened to ‘*Bill cut the cak*e’, but the syntactically identical ‘*She put the book on the shelf’* cannot be shortened to *’ *She put the book’* .

*‘Treatment healed my wounds’* can delete its agent to give ‘ *My wounds healed’* , but the similar ‘*Treatment cured my wounds’* does not allow agent-deletion to *’ *My wounds cured’* .

As can be seen, languages such as English are very haphazard in the various constraints on argument structure applied to individual verbs. Sometimes it is possible to delete arguments but at other times doing so results in an ungrammatical sentence, even though a semantically equivalent paraphrase exists. New Ithkuil has no such constraints on its argument structure. As long as a sentence makes sense semantically and the relationships between explicit or implied arguments and their verb can be determined or inferred, then the New Ithkuil sentence will be grammatically permissible. This is possible because its nouns are marked for semantically-based case, as well as the fact that verbs are marked for Function, a category we discussed in Section 3.8 above.

The example sentences above illustrate that the deletion of implied arguments requires a listener/reader to infer the existence of those arguments required for the sentence to make sense semantically. New Ithkuil, like natural languages, allows for such deletion of implied arguments. However, if necessary to avoid ambiguity, or to explicitly indicate the status of such deleted arguments, the language provides an affix to delineate the role of arguments inferred by the listener. This affix, the SIA Staus of Inferred Arguments affix is listed in [**Sec. 4.2.11**](04#Sec4_2_11) below.

## 4.2 The Transrelative Cases {#Sec4_2}

The Transrelative cases refer to nine cases used to identify nouns functioning as participants to a verb, what in Western grammatical terms would be referred to as “subjects” and “objects” and most likely marked as either nominative, accusative, or dative. It is these cases which more or less correspond to the semantic roles identified in Sec. 4.1 above. The nine transrelative cases are the **THEMATIC** , **INSTRUMENTAL** , **ABSOLUTIVE** , **AFFECTIVE** , **STIMULATIVE** , **EFFECTUATIVE** , **ERGATIVE** , **DATIVE** , and **INDUCIVE** . Following are explanations of the function and usage of each case. Examples of these cases in use are provided in [**Sec. 4.2.10**](04#Sec4_2_10) below.

### 4.2.1 `THM` The Thematic Case {#Sec4_2_1}

The **THEMATIC** case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**a** in Slot IX of a formative. It indicates the (usually inanimate) party which is a participant to the verbal predicate where that participant does not undergo any tangible change of state. Its semantic role is that of CONTENT, as described earlier in Sec. 4.1.2.

### 4.2.2 `INS` The Instrumental Case {#Sec4_2_2}

The **INSTRUMENTAL** case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**ä** in Slot IX of a formative. It indicates the entity acting as means utilized by an explicit or implicit agent to implement/carry out the effect/impact of an act/event. Its semantic role is that of INSTRUMENT, as described earlier in Sec. 4.1.1.

### 4.2.3 `ABS` The Absolutive Case {#Sec4_2_3}

The **ABSOLUTIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**e** in Slot IX of a formative. It indicates the party that is the target of, or undergoes, the effect/impact or change of state as a result of a tangible act/event. Its semantic role is that of PATIENT, as described earlier in Sec. 4.1.1.

### 4.2.4 `AFF` The Affective Case {#Sec4_2_4}

The **AFFECTIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**i** in Slot IX of a formative. It indicates the party who undergoes an unwilled, affective experience, e.g., coughing, sneezing, feeling hot/cold, trembling, experiencing sensory input (tactile, olfactory, visual, aural, gustatory), proprioceptive states, psychological/emotional states, reflex reactions such as cringing, yawning, ducking, screaming in fright, etc. Its semantic role is that of EXPERIENCER, as described earlier in Sec. 4.1.2.

### 4.2.5 `STM` The Stimulative Case {#Sec4_2_5}

The **STIMULATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**ëi** in Slot IX of a formative. It indicates the party/entity/idea/thought/situation or mental state which triggers an unwilled, affective response or is the trigger for an existential states with no tangibly affected patient, e.g., ***The hammer*** * exemplifies toolship, The man possesses **a cat** , That book contains **poems** .* . Its semantic role is that of STIMULUS, as described earlier in Sec. 4.1.2.

### 4.2.6 `EFF` The Effectuative Case {#Sec4_2_6}

The **EFFECTUATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**ö** in Slot IX of a formative. It indicates the party/force that initiates a chain of causal events or who induces another party to act as an agent. Note that the exact nature of the enablement is specifiable via the **ENB** affix described in the [**Affixes**](http://ithkuil.net/newithkuil_affixes.pdf) document. Its semantic role is that of ENABLER, as described earlier in Sec. 4.1.2.

### 4.2.7 `ERG` The Ergative Case {#Sec4_2_7}

The **ERGATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**o** in Slot IX of a formative. It indicates the animate party or inanimate force which initiates/causes an act/event which creates a tangible effect or change of state in a patient. Its semantic role is that of AGENT or FORCE, as described earlier in Sec. 4.1.1.

### 4.2.8 `DAT` The Dative Case {#Sec4_2_8}

The **DATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**ü** in Slot IX of a formative. Its semantic role is that of RECIPIENT, as described earlier in Sec. 4.1.2, indicating the party which is the (intended) recipient of a verb of transference, transmission, or communication. Examples: *Give **the dog** a bone, I’ll tell **her** your secret, The host introduced me **to the guests*** .

### 4.2.9 `IND` The Inducive Case {#Sec4_2_9}

The **INDUCIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**u** in Slot IX of a formative. Its semantic role is that of simultaneous AGENT and PATIENT, as described earlier in Sec. 4.1.1, indicating the patient who undergoes the tangible effect, impact, or change of state of an act/event initiated/caused by that self-same party. Examples: ***The boys**** run in the playground, **We** talked for hours, **The couple** eats dinner*.

### 4.2.10 Examples of the Transrelative Cases in Use {#Sec4_2_10}

The following are examples of various New Ithkuil sentences showing how assigning different Transrelative cases to the noun participants (i.e., the arguments to the verb) allows for various changes in meaning, regardless of argument structure. As can be seen, the English translations of many of these sentences often require word order changes, word-substitution, even outright paraphrase, all in order to accommodate the constraints on English argument structure.

Roots used: - **ksk** - Stem 2, BASIC Specification *‘anger; be angry/feel anger’*

-**kš** - Stem 1, OBJECTIVE Specification *‘clown’*

STA = STATIVE function DAT = DATIVE case DYN = DYNAMIC function CPT = COMPLETIVE version

IND = INDUCIVE case AFF = AFFECTIVE case GEN = GENITIVE case PRX = PROXIMAL extension

ABS = ABSOLUTIVE case ERG = ERGATIVE case LOC = LOCATIVE case

NOTE: The categories of Function and Version are detailed in Chapter 5.

More examples of Transrelative case patterns, using the roots - **žx** - Stem 1, BASIC Specification *‘*burn’** and - **lḑ** - Stem 1, BASIC Specification *‘tree’* *:*

Other patterns are possible. For example, the following chart shows patterns that can be used to translate variations on English *‘I hit my leg with a rock’* , or *‘I hit myself on the leg with a rock’* , or *‘A rock hit me on the leg.’*

- **ţd** - Stem 2, BASIC Specification *‘forceful physical contact’* + suffix FRC₁/7 - **osm** **- => ** ‘hit/strike’
-**šn **Stem 1, BASIC Specification *‘leg (as physical body part)’* + suffix Rdp₃/3 - **ioth** **- ** ** => ** ‘their (sg.) leg’
- **ggw** - Stem 1, OBJECTIVE Specification *‘(piece of) rock / (piece/chunk of) stone’*

Note that all of the above sentences can be restated without the presence of the rock as instrument:

### 4.2.11 Specialized Suffixes Used to Expand the Functionality of the Transrelative Cases {#Sec4_2_11}

It should be noted that New Ithkuil provides an array of Slot V or Slot VII suffixes specifically designed to work in conjunction with nouns inflected into one of the Transrelative cases to significantly expand their ability to specify the exact nature of the causal relationships between participants to a verb in an Ithkuil sentence. These suffixes include the **CNS** Consent suffix, the **RSN** Reason suffix, the **XPT** Expectation suffix, the **DLB** Deliberateness suffix, the **ENB** Enablement suffix, the **AGN** Agency/Intent suffix, and the **IMP** Impact suffix. These affixes are shown below (see [**Chapter 7**](07) for a discussion on the morpho-phonological structure of Slot V and Slot VII Affixes).

### 4.2.12 Use of the CHC Affix with Transrelative Cases {#Sec4_2_12}

This affix is used to specify the exact semantic relationships between the participants to verbs such as “eat” and “sing” where case-marking alone is insufficient to describe the exact nature of the participants’ enablement of an action.

**Example:** The following chart of sentences illustrates the use of the **CHC** affix as a means of distinguishing various semantic relationships between **EFF** , **ERG** , **IND** , **DAT** , and **CSM** participants to the act of eating (see [**Sec. 4.5.5**](04#Sec4_5_5) for the **CSM** CONSUMPTIVE case).

Here are additional examples using the verb ‘jump.’

Additional examples using the verb ‘sing’:

### 4.2.13 Using the Transrelative Cases to Achieve “Middle Voice” Semantic Effects {#Sec4_2_13}

English (among other languages) allows some of its verbs to operate both transitively (i.e., taking a direct object) as well as intransitively (i.e., without a direct object), where the object of the transitive sentence becomes the subject of the intransitive sentence. Furthermore, the intransitive sentence describes the same potential event as the transitive version does, except that no agent is expressed, the focus of the sentence being on the result, not the act which gives rise to the result. Examples:

The manager opened the store at 8 a.m.

The store opened at 8 a.m.

Robert flies the airplane beautifully.

The airplane flies beautifully.

The engineer increased the pressure.

The pressure increased.

I molded the soft clay easily.

The soft clay molded easily.

Note that the second sentence of each pair above is semantically distinct from its passive voice equivalent (i.e., *The store was opened at 8 a.m., The airplane is flown beautifully, The pressure was increased, The soft clay was molded easily* ) in that passives allow for the agent to be overtly stated (using the preposition ‘by’ in English, as in *The store was opened by the manager* ) or, if absent, nevertheless imply the existence of the agent. However, the intransitive sentences above (equivalent to “middle voice” constructions is languages such as Swahili or Turkish) do not allow for expression of an agent and are designed to suppress the semantic relevance (or *saliency* ) of the agent.

However, English is very haphazard and idiosyncratic as to what verbs it allows to operate this way, often having to resort to paraphrase and idiomatic structures to accomplish the same effects as in the four intransitive sentences above. For example [ungrammatical sentences are preceded by an asterisk]:

*Father painted the fence yellow.*
** The fence painted yellow.*
*(*But:* The fence came out yellow.)*

*I noticed a storm on the horizon.*
** A storm noticed on the horizon.*
*(*But: *A storm came into view on the horizon.)*

*The owner keeps scissors with the sewing supplies.*
** Scissors keep with the sewing supplies.*
*(*But: *Scissors belong/stay with the sewing supplies.)*

*Fans buy beer a lot at baseball games.*
** Beer buys a lot at baseball games.*
*(*But: *Beer sells a lot at baseball games.)*

Of course, many English speakers would simply use the passive voice or a construction using ‘get’ to accomplish the same thing (i.e., *The fence was/got painted yellow, A storm was noticed on the horizon, The scissors are/get kept with the sewing supplies, Beer is/gets bought a lot at baseball games* .) without worrying about the existence of an implied agent.

Many languages utilize reflexive constructions to accomplish this effect, e.g., Spanish *Se habla español aquí* , literally “Spanish speaks itself here,” meaning *Spanish is spoken here* .

New Ithkuil, however, can manipulate the assignment of case to verb arguments to achieve this “middle voice” effect for any verb where it is semantically feasible, without having to resort to idiomatic constructions or paraphrase. For example:

**Yantxe** **čmeihá aţpwato** **.**
‘chew’-DIF₁/3-REP ‘snail’-MSS-**ERGATIVE**
*The snails chew easily.* [meaning: It is easy for the snails to chew things.]

versus:

**Yantxe** **čmeihá aţpwate** **.**
‘chew’-DIF₁/3-REP ‘snail’-MSS-**ABSOLUTIVE**
*The snails chew easily.* [meaning: It is easy to chew (on) the snails.]

## 4.3 The Appositive Cases {#Sec4_3}

Those Western languages which have possessive cases usually have only one such case, often functioning in a vague and ambiguous way to show varying types of relationships between two nouns. For example, notice the differing relationships expressed by the possessive in the following English sentences:

*the man’s hat* = the hat belonging to him [alienable possession]
*the man’s house* = the house he legally owns [proprietary responsibility]
*the man’s arm* = part of his body [inalienable component]
*the man’s brother* = the brother related to him [genetic relationship]
*the man’s happiness* = he feels happy [affective experience]
*the man’s rescue* = he was or will be rescued [target of others’ purpose]
*the man’s gift* = the gift is for him [benefaction]
*the man’s gift* = the gift is from him [source]
*the man’s world* = the world in which he lives [inherent subjective association]
*the man’s team* = the team he is associated with [interactive mutual association]
*the man’s story* = the story about him [topical reference]
*the man’s painting* = the picture he painted [creation/authorship]
*the man’s command* = his being a commander [role or function]

In many instances, the English possessive is totally ambiguous, e.g., does ‘the man’s story’ mean the one he wrote or the one about him? Regarding ‘the man’s rescue,’ did the man do the rescuing or is he the one being rescued? Is ‘the man’s gift’ one he is giving or receiving? New Ithkuil is more exact in specifying the nature of these relationships via case. Many of the above relationships are addressed by the nine Appositive cases and still others by the nine Associative cases presented in Sec. 4.4.

The Appositive cases make a distinction between alienable versus inalienable possession or attribution, as well as distinguishing whether the possession is inherent to the possessor or imposed or caused from without. These distinctions are explained below. Like Western languages (and unlike many American Indian and North Caucasian languages), the case marking is on the possessor noun, not the possessed. The nine Appositive cases are the **POSSESSIVE** , **PROPRIETIVE** , **GENITIVE** , **ATTRIBUTIVE** , **PRODUCTIVE** , **INTERPRETATIVE**, , **ORIGINATIVE** , **INTERDEPENDENT** and **PARTITIVE** . Following are explanations of the function and usage of each case.

### 4.3.1 `POS` The Possessive Case {#Sec4_3_1}

The **POSSESSIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` **affix** -**ai** in formative Slot IX. The POSSESSIVE is used to refer to a noun which has alienable (i.e., removable or severable) possession of another noun in the sense of having physical control or oversight of that noun, whether by chance circumstance or deliberate manipulation. The two nouns are not in any sense inherent parts of one another and the relationship between the two can be theoretically or actually terminated by an outside force or influence, or by decision of the possessor, usually by means of mere physical permanent separation of the possessor and possessed nouns. The possessive would be used to translate English phrases such as ***his**** coat* (e.g., the one he is wearing, regardless of whether he owns it or not), ***the boy’s**** book* (e.g., the one in his hand), ***Father’s**** chair* (e.g., the one he happens to be sitting in, as in a restaurant).

**kštala wampeicai**

‘chair’-[default `Ca` ]-THM [default `Ca` ]-‘parent’-GID₂/3-**POS**

*‘father’s chair’ * [i.e., the one he’s sitting in]

### 4.3.2 `PRP` The Proprietive Case {#Sec4_3_2}

The **PROPRIETIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` **affix** -**au** in formative Slot IX. The PROPRIETIVE identifies a noun having alienable possession of another noun in the sense of quasi-permanent contextual control, ownership or oversight, whether by societal recognition, social convention, law, purchase or decree, which mere physical separation does not sever. The two nouns are not in any sense inherent parts of one another, however the relationship cannot be terminated except via an equally or more binding act, declaration, convention, law, process, etc. Using the same English examples used with the POSSESSIVE above, we can analyze the connotative difference: ***his**** coat* (i.e., the one he owns, regardless of whether he is wearing it or not), ***the boy’s**** book* (e.g., the one he bought), ***Father’s**** chair* (e.g., the one quasi-permanently assigned to him).

**onţläla wampeicau**

STEM.0-‘automobile’-CTE-[default `Ca` ]-THM [default `Ca` ]-‘parent’-GID₂/3-**PRP**

*‘father’s car’*

### 4.3.3 `GEN` The Genitive Case {#Sec4_3_3}

The GENITIVE case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**ei** in formative Slot IX. The GENITIVE is used to refer to a noun which has inalienable (i.e., unremovable, unseverable) possession of or association with another noun in the sense of having that noun as an inherent or intrinsic attribute, characteristic, physical part, or genetic (i.e., familial) bond, e.g., ***my**** hand, ****the building’s**** doors, ****the child’s**** father, the essence * ***of that woman*** .


### 4.3.4 `ATT` The Attributive Case {#Sec4_3_4}

The ATTRIBUTIVE case is marked by the the `Vc` affix -**eu** in formative Slot IX. The ATTRIBUTIVE is used to refer to a noun which inalienably experiences the effects of, or otherwise has an affective (see the AFFECTIVE case above) relationship with another noun, either as a temporary or permanent attribute, characteristic, or experience, whether physical or psychological, objective or subjective in nature. Examples: ***his**** pain, ****Mother’s**** guilt, ****the child’s**** cough, ****Dorothy’s**** mood, ****Davey’s**** happiness, ****the teacher’s**** stubbornness, ****my*** * needs* .

### 4.3.5 `PDC` The Productive Case {#Sec4_3_5}

The PRODUCTIVE case is marked by the the `Vc` affix -**ëu** in formative Slot IX. The PRODUCTIVE identifies the creator, author or originator of another noun, e.g., ***the girl’s**** poem, ****the clowns’*** *plan, ****my**** statue* (i.e., the one I sculpted).

**eňalţra wampacëu**

‘written.composition’-ASO/MDS/G ‘parent’-GID₁/1-**PDC**

*‘mother’s writings’*

### 4.3.6 `ITP` The Interpretative Case {#Sec4_3_6}

The INTERPRETATIVE case is marked by the the `Vc` affix -**ou** in Formative Slot IX. The INTERPRETATIVE identifies a noun acting as the subjective interpretational context of another noun, that is the noun by or through which another noun is subjectively interpreted or described, as exemplified by the phrases ***Monet’s*** * Paris* , ***our**** world, life * ***as seen/experienced by children*** .

**yerla kšilou**

PRX-‘subjective.viewpoint’-THM ‘clown’-** ITP**

*‘the clown’s point of view’*

### 4.3.7 `OGN` The Originative Case {#Sec4_3_7}

The ORIGINATIVE case is marked by the the `Vc` affix -**oi** in formative Slot IX. The ORIGINATIVE identifies a noun as being the literal or figurative source of another, or which is the native location, origin, or usual locational context for another. , e.g., ***the man’s**** story* (i.e., the one he told), ***our**** gift* (i.e., the one we are giving), *water * ***from the river*** *, the fruit * ***of the tree*** , *Fix the ****kitchen**** sink!* (i.e. the one found in the kitchen), ***Desert**** rocks are so beautiful* (i.e., whether being spoken about rocks taken from the desert or rocks still present in the desert), ***Northern*** * women are easy-going* .

The ORIGINATIVE should be distinguished from the ABLATIVE in [**Sec. 4.8.4**](04#Sec4_8_4) below, in that the ABLATIVE signifies position or path of motion away from, whereas the ORIGINATIVE merely presents a locational context as a means of description or to distinguish the noun from an otherwise similar noun.

**ekcatra walḑoi**

‘fruit’-MSS/G-THM ‘tree’-** OGN**

*‘the fruit of a tree’*

### 4.3.8 `IDP` The Interdependent Case {#Sec4_3_8}

The INTERDEPENDENT case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**iu** in formative Slot IX. The INTERDEPENDENT identifies a noun which has a coordinated, tandem, complementary or mutually dependent relationship with another. The relationship between the two nouns can be thought of as reciprocal in nature, i.e., each noun implies the other or needs the other to exist within its natural context, e.g., *the* *** students*** *’** teacher, an ****army**** general, the blood * ***in my veins*** *, the driver * ***of the truck*** *, the **nation’s** leader, ****his**** team* (i.e., the one on which he’s a member). Note that this case does not imply a part-whole dependency as with the GENITIVE case above, e.g., it would **not** be used to translate *the book’s pages* , or *the leaves of a tree* .

**wailpla endyaftioriu**

G-‘blood’-THM ‘vein’-MDC/PRX-GEN/1m/BEN-**IDP**

*‘the blood in my veins’*

### 4.3.9 `PAR` The Partitive Case {#Sec4_3_9}

The **PARTITIVE** case is marked by the the `Vc` affix -**ui** in formative Slot IX. The PARTITIVE indicates a quantitative or content-to-container relationship between the two nouns, e.g., *a cup * ***of coffee*** *, a box(ful) * ***of books*** *, a train(load) * ***of refugees*** ***.***

The PARTITIVE is also used to mark a noun qualified by a specific number, e.g., *three * ***boxes*** *, two * ***clowns*** *, twenty * ***words*** . This usage described in [**Sec. 13.4**](13#Sec13_4), where we will see that, in New Ithkuil, numbers are formatives (i.e., full nouns and verbs), not adjectives as in Western languages. Additionally, a noun qualified by a number is not pluralized. In other words, one does not say ‘three boxes,’ but rather “a trio of a box” or perhaps more eloquently, “a box trio.”

**unţwäla kšiţui**

‘bus’-THM ‘clown’-MDS-**PAR**

*‘a busload of clowns’*

## 4.4 The Associative Cases

The Associative cases refer to a group of nine cases which modify a formative to show that it has and adjectival relationship to another, usually adjacent formative. Most of these cases correspond to relationships in which, in English translation, we find two nouns together in apposition or as a compound noun, as in *cat box, schoolbook, peace march, mountain man,* etc., or joined by the word ‘of’ in a non-possessive relationship, e.g., *dreams of youth, sounds of laughter,* or as a modifier of a verbal phrase. The nine Associative cases are the APPLICATIVE, PURPOSIVE, TRANSMISSIVE, DEFERENTIAL, CONTRASTIVE, TRANSPOSITIVE, COMMUTATIVE, COMPARATIVE, and CONSIDERATIVE. Following are explanations of the function and usage of each case.

### 4.4.1 `APL` The Applicative Case {#Sec4_4_1}

The APPLICATIVE case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**ia** (or -**uä** if immediately preceded by - **y** -) in formative Slot IX. The APPLICATIVE identifies a noun which represents the purpose for which another noun is to be utilized in a given instance. As such, it usually translates English ‘for’ when meaning ‘for the temporary or incidental use/purpose of.’ Examples of usage would be *a cup for coffee* (i.e., a cup being used incidentally to hold coffee), *a box for tools* (i.e., the box is only temporarily being used to hold tools), *a room for changing.* Note that the use of the APPLICATIVE can extend to usages beyond English ‘for,’ as in *a “weapon” cat* = ‘a cat used as a weapon,’ or *a “projectile” book* = ‘a book used as a projectile.’

**rrala udklälia**

‘cat’-THM ‘projectile.weapon’-CTE-**APL**

*‘a cat for use as a projectile weapon’*

### 4.4.2 `PUR` The Purposive Case {#Sec4_4_2}

The PURPOSIVE case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **ie** - (or -**uë** if immediately preceded by - **y** -) in formative Slot IX. The PURPOSIVE identifies a noun which characterizes or defines the purpose of, or reason for, another noun. The PURPOSIVE is subtly distinct from the APPLICATIVE above, in that the latter names the actual use to which a noun is put on a given occasion or in given context, whereas the PURPOSIVE defines another noun’s dedicated function or primary reason for being, outside of any contextual instance, i.e., what the noun is used for all the time (or at least its intended use). It generally translates English ‘as,’ ‘of’ or ‘for’ when meaning ‘for the purpose of’ or alternately an English noun-noun expression or a compound noun. Examples of usage would be *a ****coffee**** cup, a ****tool****box, a ****litter**** box, a ****trash****can.*

**skela agçiţrie**

‘container/receptacle’-CSV-THM ‘trash/garbage’-OBJ-MDS/G-**PUR**

*‘a trashcan / a garbage bin’*

### 4.4.3 `TRA` The Transmissive Case {#Sec4_4_3}

The **TRANSMISSIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **io** - (or -**üä** if immediately preceded by - **y** -) in formative Slot IX. The TRANSMISSIVE identifies a noun for whose sake or benefit an action or event occurs or is done or the party to whose detriment an action or event occurs. As such, the TRANSMISSIVE is similar to the DATIVE, except that the TRANSMISSIVE implies a strong emphasis on the fact that the noun is more than simply the recipient or target of a dative action, but rather either benefits or is affected detrimentally in a tangible or consequential way from the action or event. It is usually translated by English ‘for’ in the sense of ‘for the sake (i.e., benefit) of.’ Examples of usage are *a toy * ***for the children*** *, We threw ****him**** a party, Go to* *the * ***teachers*** *’* * lounge* , *I’ll be inspecting the **prisoners’** cells* .

**utxala welio**

‘drink’- THM ‘child’-**TRA**

*‘a drink for the child’*

### 4.4.4 `DFR` The Deferential Case {#Sec4_4_4}

The DEFERENTIAL case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **iö** - (or -**üë** if immediately preceded by - **y** -) in formative Slot IX. The DEFERENTIAL translates the English phrases ‘out of respect for,’ ‘for the sake of,’ or ‘in deference toward,’ identifying the noun to which deference is paid within the context for an act, condition, or event. Examples of usage would be *He remained silent * ***for her sake*** *, They went on with the ceremony * ***out of respect for the families*** *, They dressed in robes * ***because of tradition*** .

**ujtajiö**

‘tradition’-A-**DFR**

*‘out of respect for tradition’*

### 4.4.5 `CRS` The Contrastive Case {#Sec4_4_5}

The CONTRASTIVE case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**eë** in formative Slot IX. The CONTRASTIVE identifies a noun which has been replaced by another or for which another noun has been substituted. This is translatable by the English phrases ‘instead of’ or ‘rather than’ or ‘as opposed to,’ or specialized uses of ‘not,’ e.g., ***Instead of rain*** *, it snowed; They hired her as a cook, * ***as opposed to a maid*** *;* *I prefer peas * ***to carrots*** *; * ***Rather than marigolds*** *, let’s buy carnations; That's sugar,* ***not salt*** .

**Wat alcmar afdareë.**

(default `Ca` )-‘be.what.is.under.discussion’-PRX-(OBS) ‘sugar’-G-(THM) ‘salt’-G-**CRS**

*‘It’s sugar, not salt.’*

### 4.4.6 `TSP` The Transpositive Case {#Sec4_4_6}

The TRANSPOSITIVE case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**uö** (or -**öë** if immediately preceded by - **w** -) in formative Slot IX. The TRANSPOSITIVE implies substitution of one noun for another. It translates English ‘for’ in the sense of ‘on behalf of,’ ‘in place of,’ or ‘instead of’ (i.e., ‘as a substitution for’). Examples of usage are *The boss made the speech * ***for me*** *, She went up into the attic ****for her brother*** (i.e., so he wouldn’t have to).

**Xpulá kšilo waigvbre waiňnuö.**

‘act. of.substitution’-DYN-OBS ‘clown’-ERG G-‘methane’-ABS ‘oxygen’-G-**TSP**

*‘The clown is substituting methane for oxygen.’*

### 4.4.7 `CMM` The Commutative Case {#Sec4_4_7}

The COMMUTATIVE case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**uo** (or -**öä** if immediately preceded by - **w** -) in formative Slot IX. The COMMUTATIVE translates English ‘for’ in the sense of ‘in exchange for’ as in *You paid too much money * ***for that dress*** *, She kills * ***for thrills*** .

**Weščayá ampasu hakšilaölwie-addyabzëuttuo welio.**

‘pay.money’-RTR-OBS ‘parent’-DPX-IND CONCATENATED:‘clown’-TFM-PUR-PARENT:‘teacher/student.complementary.interaction’-FEA₂/5-MSS-**CMM ** ‘child’-TRA

*‘The parents paid for the child’s clown lessons.’*

### 4.4.8 `CMP` The Comparative Case {#Sec4_4_8}

The COMPARATIVE case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**ue** (or -**ië** if immediately preceded by - **w** -) in formative Slot IX. The COMPARATIVE identifies a noun being compared to another. It translates such expressions as ‘as compared to,’ or certain usages of ‘versus’ or ‘as opposed to.’ It is similar to the CONTRASTIVE case (see Section 4.4.5 above), except that it does not carry the sense of opposition, joint exclusivity, or either-or binary substitution of the CONTRASTIVE, but rather merely comparison/choice/preference from various options or along a spectrum or scale. With verbal case-frames (see [**Sec. 6.2**](06#Sec6_2)) it would translate as ‘whereas’ or ‘while’ (in its synonymous usage to ‘whereas’). Examples are *She chose the red one * ***as opposed to the others*** *, Sam drives a van * ***versus Joe*** *, who prefers a truck* .

**Amsävá wialcma afdavue.**

‘taste.sweet’-CTE-N-OBS N-‘sugar’-THM ‘salt’-N-**CMP**

*‘Sugar is sweet compared to salt.’*

Note that the COMPARATIVE case is also used with the morphological category of Level, discussed in [**Sec. 5.5**](05#Sec5_5).

### 4.4.9 `CSD` The Considerative Case {#Sec4_4_9}

The CONSIDERATIVE case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**ua** (or -**iä** if immediately preceded by - **w** -) in formative Slot IX. It translates English terms such as ‘according to,’ ‘in the opinion of.’ Examples of usage would be ***In my opinion**** he’s a coward; * ***According to our teacher*** *, humans are descended from apes* .

**eddyulua**

Stem.2-‘teach’-OBJ-[default `Ca` ]-**CSD**

*‘according to the teacher’*

## 4.5 Adverbial Cases

Similar the Associative cases above, the Adverbial cases are a group of nine cases which modify a formative to show it has an adverbial relationship to another, usually adjacent formative. The nine Adverbial cases are the FUNCTIVE, TRANSFORMATIVE, CLASSIFICATIVE, RESULTATIVE, CONSUMPTIVE, CONCESSIVE, AVERSIVE, CONVERSIVE, and SITUATIVE.

### 4.5.1 `FUN` The Functive Case {#Sec4_5_1}

The **FUNCTIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**ao** in formative Slot IX. It functions similarly to English adverbs ending in *-ly* or the adverbial use of *with* , identifying the manner in which an action, event, or state occurs or exists. More exactly, it identifies a noun used to characterize the manner of the act, state, or event, translatable most accurately by the phrase ‘in a manner characterized by….’ Examples would be: *She dances ****gracefully*** (i.e., in a manner characterized by grace),* The boys ate * ***with gusto*** *, That clown is speaking * ***nonsense*** *, Father speaks * ***with such fortitude*** .

**Wamá kšilu wiamfmavügao.**

‘speak’-OBS ‘clown’-OBJ-IND ‘act.of.assurance’-N-EXN₁/8-** FUN **

*‘The clown speaks most assuredly.’*

### 4.5.2 `TFM` The Transformative Case {#Sec4_5_2}

The **TRANSFORMATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**aö** in formative Slot IX. The TRANSFORMATIVE identifies the outcome or final state of a process, often translatable by ‘to,’ ‘until,’ or ‘into’ in the sense of reaching a final state after having undergone some transformation. Example usages would be *The house burned * ***to ashes*** *, The clown reached **a state** * ***of tranquility*** *, The clowns will turn our children * ***into slaves*** *, Her father drank himself * ***to death*** .

**Weščayá ampasu hakšilaölwie-addyëubzattuo welio.**

‘pay.money’-RTR-OBS ‘parent’-DPX-IND Concatenated:‘clown’- **TFM** -PUR-Parent:‘teacher/student.complementary.interaction’-FEA₂/5-MSS-TSP ‘child’-TRA

*‘The parents paid for the child’s clown lessons.’* [LITERALLY: ‘the parents paid for lessons-for-becoming-a-clown for the child’]

### 4.5.3 `CLA` The Classificative Case {#Sec4_5_3}

The **CLASSIFICATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **eo** . The CLASSIFICATIVE identifies a noun as a basis for arranging, sorting, classifying, or counting, translating various English prepositions and phrases used for this purpose. Example of usage are *Place them * ***in groups of three*** *, The workers arranged the tables * ***in rows*** *, He lay down * ***lengthwise*** *, Can you count * ***by fives*** *?, I will sort them * ***by color*** .

The CLASSIFICATIVE is also used to identify a noun considered in consecutively recurring increments as a means of describing the manner of an event. Examples: *The fertilizer factory keeps rolling them out, * ***bag upon bag*** *; * ***Patient by patient*** *, the nurse administered injections; **One bomb after another** fell on the city* . When used with time periods, however, it is more usual to utilize the SELECTIVE case (see [**Sec. 4.7.5**](04#Sec4_7_5)), however CLASSIFICATIVE can be used instead to emphasize the repetitive nature of an event. Examples would be ***Month by month*** *, their departure crept closer; * ***Year after year*** *, I see more and more clowns; * ***Day in*** *,* *** day out*** *, he’s always working.*

### 4.5.4 `RSL` The Resultative Case {#Sec4_5_4}

The RESULTATIVE case is marked by the **Vc** affix - **e**ö**** . The RESULTATIVE identifies a result or consequence, usually translatable utilizing a clause-like structure in English. Examples: *He smoked since his teenage years, **hence his early death** ; The girl has studied for years, **making her an expert** , Clowns have secretly infiltrated our schools, **the consequence being our corrupt children*** ; *The team made several errors during the game, **resulting in a loss**.*

**wadpweö **

‘act.of.blackmail’-**RSL **

*‘resulting in (an act of) blackmail’ *

### 4.5.5 `CSM` The Consumptive Case {#Sec4_5_5}

The CONSUMPTIVE case is marked by the **Vc** affix - **oë** . The CONSUMPTIVE identifies the resource consumed or used (up) as a result of, or as a concurrent part of a process. Examples: *She cooks with tomatoes, The clown fed her an apple, He reads by candle(light)* .

**Elkswuvá wampacu aţmwaroë.**

‘cook.seafood’-DYN-N-OBS ‘parent’-GID₁/1-IND G-‘wine’-**CSM**

* ‘Mother cooks seafood with wine.’*

### 4.5.6 `CON` The Concessive Case {#Sec4_5_6}

The CONCESSIVE case is marked by the **Vc** affix -**öe**. The CONCESSIVE case identifies a noun, situation, or circumstance which gives rise to an expectation of a certain result which, in fact, does not occur. This can be translated by various English prepositions, conjunctions, or phrases such as ‘despite,’ ‘in spite of,’ ‘notwithstanding,’ ‘although,’ ‘regardless of,’ ‘no matter what,’ etc. Examples of usage: ***In spite of his stupidity*** *, he passed the test; * ***The law notwithstanding*** *, I will stand my ground; ****No matter how ignorant**** (they may be), they are welcome, * ***Although foreigners*** *, we will let them attend the meeting.*

**wardplitöe **

‘act.of.embezzlement’-DCD₁/4-**CON **

*‘in spite of that (act of) embezzlement’ *

### 4.5.7 `AVR` The Aversive Case {#Sec4_5_7}

The AVERSIVE case is marked by the **Vc** affix -**oe**. The AVERSIVE identifies a noun as a source or object of fear and/or avoidance. With nouns, it translates expressions such as ‘for fear of,’ ‘in order to avoid,’ or ‘in avoidance of.’ With verb phrases (i.e., case-frames; see [**Sec. 6.2**](06#Sec6_2)) , it would translate English ‘lest.’ Examples of usage are *She finished her plate * ***for fear of my wrath*** *, I traveled by night * ***to avoid the sun*** .

**Wiamftrá ru avtyävairxoe. **

N-‘engage.in.drinking.contest’-OBS 1m/DET-IND ‘state.of.chemical.intoxication **’** -N-SIM₂/1-**AVR **

*‘I engage in drinking contests out of fear of sobriety.’ *

### 4.5.8 `CVS` The Conversive Case {#Sec4_5_8}

The CONVERSIVE case is marked by the **Vc** affix - **öa** . The CONVERSIVE is used in conjunction with hypothetical or potential contexts to identify a hypothetical exception to a potential outcome or an actual circumstance which alters or has altered a potential outcome. This translates two different ways into English. Where it indicates an exception to a hypothetical situation, it is translated by the conjunction ‘unless’ in verbal contexts, and by the preposition ‘without’ for nouns. If applied to a real or actual situation, it is translatable by such expressions as ‘except for’, ‘but for,’ ‘if not for,’ ‘if it wasn’t for,’ or ‘if it wasn’t on account of.’ Example of usage: *She loves everybody **except clowns** ; **Without peace** *, this society is doomed; * **If not for the rain** *, we would have had a good time; All animals are vermin **except cats** ; He’ll eat anything** but (not) spinach**** **.**

**Wašḑayá cwe warröa. **

‘remove’-RTR-OBS Mx/NEU/A-ABS ‘cat **’** -**CVS **

*‘Everything was removed except the cat.’ *

### 4.5.9 `SIT` The Situative Case {#Sec4_5_9}

The **SITUATIVE** case is marked by the **Vc** affix - **oa** . The SITUATIVE identifies a noun as the background context for a clause without implying a direct causative relationship between the background context and the act, condition, or event which occurs. It is translatable into English by various circumlocutions, as shown in the following examples: ***Because of war*** *, our planet will never be able to join the Federation; * ***Given the presence of clowns*** *, we must accept the corruption of our children; * ***Using my plan*** *, we will defeat the enemy.*

**Wekská weli kšiloa** **. **

‘feel.anger’ -OBS ‘child’-AFF ‘clown **’** -** SIT **

*‘The child is angry because of the clown.’* [e.g., because of the clown’s presence/existence, not because of anything the clown directly did to the child]

## 4.6 The Relational Cases {#Sec4_6}

The Relational cases are yet another group of eight cases which modify a formative to show it has an particular relationship to another, usually adjacent formative.

**SPECIAL NOTE regarding `Vc` **Affix Markers for Cases 37 through 68:** The Relational cases are marked by adding a glottal stop after the vowel-forms **a** , **ä** , **e** , **i** , **ëi** , **ö** , **o** , and **u ** . However, these affixes are word-final and it is not phonotactically permissible to end a word with a glottal stop (except the Parsing Adjunct—see [**Sec. 2.7, No. 5**](02#Sec2_7_5)). Therefore, each of these affixes must be modified per the rules in [**Sec. 2.2**](02#Sec2_2), so that the forms become ** a **’** a** , **ä **’** ä** , **e **’** e** , **i **’** i** , **ë **’** i** , **ö **’** ö** , **o **’** o** , and **u **’** u** . In addition to the Relational Cases, such modifications per Sec. 2.2 apply to the remaining Affinitive, Spatio-Temporal I and Spatio-Temporal II cases as well.

Furthermore, to shorten the `Vc` affix for cases 37 through 52, this glottal-stop may instead be added to any other vocalic form in the formative after Slot II (i.e., it may be added to `Vr` in Slot IV, to `Vx` in Slots V or VII, or to `Vn` in Slot VIII) **as long as the formative does not have a Slot IV/VI a+`Ca` shortcut per **[**Sec. 3.10**](03#Sec3_10)**, and as long as the **[**Sec. 5.8**](05#Sec5_8) ** rule on moving the `Cn` Mood/Case-Scope affix to Slot VI has not been applied** .

The eight Relational cases are the PERTINENTIAL, DESCRIPTIVE, CORRELATIVE, RESULTATIVE, COMPOSITIVE, COMITATIVE, UTILITATIVE, PREDICATIVE, and RELATIVE.

### 4.6.1 `PRN` The Pertinential Case {#Sec4_6_1}

The **PERTINENTIAL** case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**a’** (realized as - **a’** **a** **)** in formative Slot IX. It identifies a formative functioning as the general referent of the verb, translating such English terms as ‘about,’ ‘regarding,’ ‘concerning,’ ‘in regard to,’ ‘in reference to,’ ‘pertaining to,’ or ‘as for.’ Examples of use would be *a song * ***of love*** *; * ***As for those books*** *, burn them!; Let’s talk * ***about clowns*** *; His attitude * ***toward women*** .

### 4.6.2 `DSP` The Descriptive Case {#Sec4_6_2}

The **DESCRIPTIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **ä’ ** (realized as - **ä’** **ä** **)** in formative Slot IX. It identifies a formative as describing another formative in an adjectival manner, translatable as ‘characterised/describable as being like’, ‘characterized/describable as having the quality/qualities of’. Examples: *That clown has an **evil** face, She is clearly a **sickly** child* .

### 4.6.3 `COR` The Correlative Case {#Sec4_6_3}

The **CORRELATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **e** **’** (realized as - **e’** **e** **)** in formative Slot IX. It indicates an abstract general relationship, association, or conjunction between one formative and another, including subjective, contextual, metaphorical, or symbolic associations. It translates general phrases such as ‘relative to,’ ‘in relation to,’ ‘in correlation with,’ ‘in association with,’ e.g., ***career**** goals, the soup o* ***f the day*** *, the direction * ***of that road*** *, The elapsed time ****relative to the distance*** *determines the winner, Our next topic is sex ****and/in art*** (i.e., the relationship between art and sex).

### 4.6.4 `CPS` The Compositive Case {#Sec4_6_4}

The **COMPOSITIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **i** **’ ** (realized as - **i’** **i** **)** in formative Slot IX. It identifies a formative as being the literal or figurative substance or component(s) of which another is made, composed, formed, built or comprised. Example of usage would be *That statue was carved * ***out of marble*** *, She owns three ****gold(en)*** *coins, We were caught in a web * ***of lies*** *, I use a ****wooden**** ladder, It was a house * ***of cards*** *, ****Three suits**** comprise his wardrobe, Joe detests ****styrofoam*** * cups* .

**aňļir atļmä’vi **

‘existent.thing’-G-THM ‘plastic **’** -CTE-N-**CPS **

*‘things made of plastic’ *

### 4.6.5 `COM` The Comitative Case {#Sec4_6_5}

The **COMITATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **ëi** **’ ** (realized as - **ë’** **i** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies a formative that accompanies another, translatable as ‘(along) with’. *My father was walking **with a loaf of bread** ; * *The clown walked to the party **with the dog** (i.e., signifying mere accompaniment, not the dog necessarily walked as well [the clown could have carried it] )* *; I’m **with the brigade** (i.e., I have merely accompanied them but am not necessarily a member); She played a game **with her sister** (i.e., signifying they participated in the same game, not necessarily as competitors), a pedestrian **with an umbrella** (i.e.,carrying it but not using it).*

When used with PARALLEL or COMPLEMENTARY valence (see [**Secs. 5.1.2**](05#Sec5_1_2) and [**5.1.5**](05#Sec5_1_5)), it signifies that the formative is being used in the same (or a complementary) way or is undergoing the same (or a complementary) activity as the other formative it is associated with. A more exact translation of such usage would be ‘in conjunction with’. Examples: *The clown walked to the party **with the child** (i.e., the child walked as well alongside)* *; I’m **with the brigade** (i.e., I am a member); She played a game **with her sister** (i.e., competing against her).*

**waleca amtri’lëi **

‘person’-GID₁/3-THM ‘hat**’** -OBJ-**COM **

*‘a man with a hat’* [carrying it, not wearing it]

### 4.6.6 `UTL` The Utilitative Case {#Sec4_6_6}

The **UTILITATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **ö** **’** (realized as - **ö’** **ö** **)** in formative Slot IX. It identifies a formative in the process of being used while some other activity or state is in progress. It does not imply the INSTRUMENT of an act as does the INSTRUMENTAL case. Examples: *the **gun-wielding** man, a pedestrian **with an umbrella** (i.e.,with it open and using it), a girl **with a backpack** (i.e., wearing it on her back **)** .*

**waleca amtri’lö **

‘person’-GID₁/3-THM ‘hat**’** -OBJ-**UTL **

*‘a man wearing a hat’ *

### 4.6.7 `PRD` The Predicative Case {#Sec4_6_7}

The **PREDICATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**o’** (realized as - **o’** **o** **)** in formative Slot IX. It identifies the non-causal basis, foundation, sustenance (literally or figuratively), or required existential condition for another noun or clause, translatable by the phrases ‘based (up)on,’ ‘dependent (up)on’ or ‘relying on.’ Examples of use are *a book * ***dependent on a publisher*** *, a man * ***relying on charity*** *, laws * ***based in reason*** *, success * ***supported by corruption*** *.*

**aẓtaţra usla’vo **

‘law’-MDS/G-THM ‘reasoning **’** -N-**PRD **

*‘laws based in reason’ *

### 4.6.8 `RLT` The Relative Case {#Sec4_6_8}

The **RELATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix -**u’** (realized as - **u’** **u** **)** in formative Slot IX. It identifies a formative as constituting a relative clause associated with the preceding formative (or whatever formative is indicated by the **DCD** affix [see the [**Affixes**](http://ithkuil.net/newithkuil_affixes.pdf) document] as being the head of the relative clause).

**kšila erḑmezwo’ivvu **

‘clown’-THM ‘act.of.cheating **’** -CSV-ACCESSOR₂:ERG-N-**RLT **

*‘a clown who cheats’ *

## 4.7 The Affinitive Cases

These are a group of eight miscellaneous cases which translate various adjectival or adverbial phrases. The eight Affinitive cases are **ACTIVATIVE** , **ASSIMILATIVE** , **ESSIVE** , **TERMINATIVE** , **SELECTIVE** , **CONFORMATIVE** , **DEPENDENT** , and **VOCATIVE** .

### 4.7.1 `ACT` The Activative Case {#Sec4_7_1}

The **ACTIVATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **ai** **’ ** (realized as - **a’** **i** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies the EXPERIENCER of a modal state, such as obligation, necessity, desire, hope, expectation, wishing, being able to, etc. functioning as the “subject” of a modal(ized) verb governing a hypothetical state (i.e., what is wanted, needed, expected, able to be done, etc.). ***Mr. Atoz**** wants peace; **I** expect justice; **We clowns** need passengers for our spaceship, uh, I mean circus tent.*

**Amskadwû kšivöla’i wiorkwa. **

‘necessity’-PRX/N-ITU ‘clown’-N- CTR₁/6-**ACT** N-‘filial.love **’** -THM

*‘I think even clowns need love.’ *

### 4.7.2 `ASI` The Assimilative Case {#Sec4_7_2}

The **ASSIMILATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **au** **’ ** (realized as - **a’** **u** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies a formative used as a context for analogy or metaphorical comparison to another formative; translatable as ‘as/like’ meaning ‘as if (it were) X’ in the sense of comparison or analogy between one thing and another that it is not, e.g., *She sings * ***like a bird*** *, * ***; *** *Treat her **as/like a princess *** (= as if she were a princess), *He talks ****like a child*** **(even though he’s an adult).**

**Malá su wela’u. **

‘talk’-OBS 2m/NEU-IND ‘child’-**ASI**

*‘You talk like a child.’* [even though you are not a child]

### 4.7.3 `ESS` The Essive Case {#Sec4_7_3}

The **ESSIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **ei** **’ ** (realized as - **e’** **i** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies the role or name by which an entity is known or contextually identified. It translates English ‘as/like’ in the sense of naming or reference to the an entity’s functional identity, e.g., *They called him * ***a clown*** *, The woman entered the club ****as an equal*** * of any man* *, We consider you **our** * ***only hope*** , * Treat her **as/like a princess *** (because she is one), *He talks ****like a child*** **(because he is a child).**

**Malá su wele’i. **

‘talk’-OBS 2m/NEU-IND ‘child’-**ESS**

*‘You talk like a child.’* [because you are one]

### 4.7.4 `TRM` The Terminative Case {#Sec4_7_4}

The **TERMINATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **eu** **’ ** (realized as - **e’** **u** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies a formative as being the goal of an act/event, e.g., *We seek **a new planet** ; a desire **to see his homeland** ; an academy **for (making) champions*** .

**Pţradá kro wailve’u. **

‘hunt’-PRX-OBS 3p/BEN +1m/BEN-ERG G-‘deer’-G-**TRM**

*‘We’re hunting deer.’*

### 4.7.5 `SEL` The Selective Case {#Sec4_7_5}

The **SELECTIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **ëu** **’ ** (realized as - **ë’** **u** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies a contextually recurring time-period, as well as a string of recurring entities, e.g., *I visit him * ***every three days*** *; * ***Each year*** *, I travel to the Clown Planet; He works * ***nights*** *; * ***By day*** *, she is an artisan; The clowns visit us * ***on Sundays*** *; * ... ***every third book*** *;** ...every green one.*** Note that if one whishes to particularly emphasize the repetitive nature of an event, the CLASSIFICATIVE can be used instead (see [**Sec. 4.5.3**](04#Sec4_5_3) above).

**walazë’u. **

‘person’-XX3₁/1-** SEL**

*‘every third person’*

### 4.7.6 `CFM` The Conformative Case {#Sec4_7_6}

The **CONFORMATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **ou** **’ ** (realized as - **o’** **u** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies the entity pursuant to which, as per which, or in conformance with which, another entity is, or an act/event occurs. Examples: *He’s leaving town ****as per orders**** from the court; You were arrested * ***pursuant to law*** *; I acted **in conformance with your expectations** .*

**Uẓtavo’u arzälalžóu sa’i. **

‘applicability.of.law’-N-**CFM **‘obey’-OBG₁/1-ADM 2m/NEU-ACT

*‘Under the law, you must obey.’*

### 4.7.7 `DEP` The Dependent Case {#Sec4_7_7}

The **DEPENDENT** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **oi** **’ ** (realized as - **o’** **i** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies a formative as being the basis of a dependency phrase on which another formative or phrase acts as the contingency, translatable as ***‘...if the circumstances regarding X are such to allow/warrant it’*** where the final “it” refers to the original contingency noun/phrase whose existence/occurrence is (at least in part) determined by or contingent upon the dependency phrase. The exact nature of the dependency can be specified using the DPC affix shown below. However, the DEPENDENT case can be used without the DPC affix to say in general, for example, *‘I’ll come, depending on what day of the week it is’, *as opposed to specifying the exact nature of the dependency by using the DPC affix, e.g., *‘I’ll come but only if it’s a certain day of the week’.*

The following chart more systematically illustrates the distinctions between the nine degrees of the affix:

Example:

**Watkwäyû welu weppļi’a kšilütřacko’i. **

‘attendance.at.event’-PRS-ITU ‘child’-IND ‘party’-LOC ‘clown’-DX1₁/8-DPC₁/1-**DEP**

*‘The child will probably only come to the party if there’s a clown there.’*

### 4.7.8 `VOC` The Vocative Case {#Sec4_7_8}

The **VOCATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **ui** **’ ** (realized as - **u** **’** **i** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies a noun being used in direct address. Examples: *“ **Mr. Atoz!** ”, “Hey, ** clown!** ”*

## 4.8 The Spatio-Temporal Cases — Group I {#Sec4_8}

This group of eight cases are used to identify contexts relating to spatial location, although in many cases they can also be used metaphorically in temporal, rather than spatial contexts. The eight cases are **LOCATIVE** , **ATTENDANT** , **ALLATIVE** , **ABLATIVE** , **ORIENTATIVE** , **INTERRELATIVE** , **INTRATIVE** , and **NAVIGATIVE** .

### 4.8.1 `LOC` The Locative Case {#Sec4_8_1}

The **LOCATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **ia** **’ ** (realized as - **i’** **a** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies the location where something is situated or occurs; ‘at / in / on / by’. Examples: *The children are **in/at the clown’s tent** ; Hortense is **by the guillotine** ; Place the four glowing nodules **on the floor** ; My uncle is **on that plane** .*

**epřeli’a**

‘entryway’-CSV-**LOC**

*‘at the entrance’*

### 4.8.2 `ATD` The Attendant Case {#Sec4_8_2}

The **ATTENDANT** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **ie** **’ ** (realized as - **i** **’** **e** ) in formative Slot IX. It functions as a variant of the LOCATIVE case, to indicate in whose presence something occurs/takes place/is situated. However, such a function has implications allowing the ATTENDANT case to identify a vague or externally determined non-causal (and potentially causal) relationship to the event/state/act/occurrence/situation in question. The party marked by ATTENDANT case becomes relevant to or involved in a situation, however, the manner of this involvement/relevancy is vague, undefined, or left to the imagination/speculation of the addressee.

The rationale behind such an interpretation of the ATTENDANT case is that the party in whose presence something occurs, if animate, implicitly becomes a witness to the occurrence. Being a witness furthermore implies that the party experiences some effect or consequence of what has taken place in their presence. Such an effect/consequence may be nothing more than maintaining a visual memory of what has occurred, but on the other hand, may result in initiating a responsive action by the witnessing party (i.e., a consequent causal act). Even inanimate entities marked for ATTENDANT case can potentially become involved in the state/act/event/situation to the point of causal consequences. For example, if a fire takes place “in the presence of” a box of fireworks, the implied consequence is obvious.

The following examples illustrate how the ATTENDANT is used to imply contexts of involvement and consequence:

Also, for sentences where the semantic role of the external head of a relative clause is left unstated (as in the left-hand sentence below), the implied case would be ATTENDANT. Thus, the two sentences below are semantically equivalent.

### 4.8.3 `ALL` The Allative Case {#Sec4_8_3}

The **ALLATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **io** **’ ** (realized as - **i** **’** **o** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies the entity toward which another entity is moving/approaching, translating English ‘to/toward’. Examples: *Go **to the window** ; The children were seen headed* ***toward the clown encampment*** .

**wajli’a**

‘mountain’-**ALL**

*‘to(ward) the mountain’*

### 4.8.4 `ABL` The Ablative Case {#Sec4_8_4}

The **ABLATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **iö** **’ ** (realized as - **i** **’** **ö** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies the entity away from which another entity is moving/receding. It translates English ‘(away) from’. Examples: *The children were seen coming **from the clown car** ; Move away **from the window** ; I’ve just come **from the store*** .

**Weru’i, gulái onţläli’ö kši’ve!**

‘child’-G-VOC ‘ambulate’-DYN-DIR ‘automobile’-CTE- **ABL ** ‘clown’-N-COR

*‘Children, walk away from the clown car!’*

### 4.8.5 `ORI` The Orientative Case {#Sec4_8_5}

The **ORIENTATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **eë** **’ ** (realized as - **e** **’** **ë** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies the entity (often a body part or sub-component) which serves as the “face” or surface or “front” or “head” of an entity in terms of external communication or interaction, or which serves as the forward “end” of a spatially orientated axis aligned to a vector of motion in terms of directional movement. Examples: *He turned his body **(to face) frontward** ; Clowns like to teach children to walk **backward(s)** ; The car suddenly veered **sideways** .*

**Gavó wioḑpu ustyale’ë.**

‘ambulate’-N-ASR/CVN N-‘crab’-IND ‘flank/side’-**ORI**

*‘They say crabs walk sideways.’*

### 4.8.6 `IRL` The Interrelative Case {#Sec4_8_6}

The **INTERRELATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **uö** **’ ** (realized as - **u** **’** **ö** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies the directional/temporal orientation or position of an entity relative to another, i.e., a noun relative to whose position in space or time another noun is being described for purposes of spatial/temporal orientation, e.g., *He turned his back **on me** , It lies just west **of the house** , Tell me when the parade starts **relative to my arrival** .*

**Arveléi iträlu’ö kši’ţe?**

‘amount.of.elapsed.time’-CSV-IRG CPT-‘process.of.approaching’-CTE-**IRL ** ‘clown’-MDS-COR

*‘How long has it been since the clowns’ arrival?’* [focus on the temporal relationship between the elapsed period of time and the point in time when the clowns arrived; compare this example to the one immediately below]

### 4.8.7 `INV` The Intrative Case {#Sec4_8_7}

The **INTRATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **uo** **’ ** (realized as) - **u** **’** **o** in formative Slot IX. It identifies a formative as being the spatio-temporal boundary point of a span or volume of space or a period of time, i.e, either the starting point or the ending point of a span of time or space. English translations include: ‘as of’ / ‘since’ /‘until’; for spatial contexts, translates as ‘as far as’, ‘up to’, or ‘between here and there’). Examples: *He’s been sad **since the (end of the) war** ; **As of noon today** , we are no longer accepting applications for clown school; Tickets for a ride to the Clown Planet are available **until noon tomorrow** ; The new lawn stretches **up to the back fence** ; Walk in the area **between the flower beds** , The train goes **as far as Los Angeles** .*

**Arveléi iträlu’o kši’ţe?**

‘amount.of.elapsed.time’-CSV-IRG CPT-‘process.of.approaching’-CTE-**INV ** ‘clown’-MDS-COR

*‘How long has it been since the clowns’ arrival?’ * [focus on the juxtaposition between one temporal context and another adjacent to it]

### 4.8.8 `NAV` The Navigative Case {#Sec4_8_8}

The **NAVIGATIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **ua** **’ ** (realized as - **u** **’** **a** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies the entity whose literal or metaphorically inferred long axis serves as the direction of another entity’s path, course, arc, or trajectory of translative motion. *The ancient Polynesians sailed the ocean **following (the paths of) the stars** ; Hortense follows **her own path** ; The UFO flew **along (the direction of) Main Street** ; He hit the ball **across the park** .*

**Tralá elařţru hakšiţé-alcialu’a.**

‘translative.motion’-OBS ‘child’-VAR/MDS/G-IND CONCATENATED: ‘clown’-MDS-COR - PARENT:’path’-RPS-**NAV**

*‘The children follow the way of the clowns.’*

## 4.9 The Spatio-Temporal Cases — Group II  {#Sec4_9}

This group of eight cases are used to identify contexts relating to time, although in many cases they can be also used metaphorically in spatial contexts. The eight cases are **CONCURSIVE** , **ASSESSIVE** , **PERIODIC** , **PROLAPSIVE** , **PRECURSIVE** , **POSTCURSIVE** , **ELAPSIVE** , and **PROLIMITIVE** .

### 4.9.1 `CNR` The Concursive Case {#Sec4_9_1}

The **CONCURSIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **ao** **’ ** (realized as - **a’** **o** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies a “temporal locative” meaning ‘at or during the time of X’, i.e., the point or stretch in time at or during which an entity or an act/event exists or occurs. Examples: *They died **during the war** ;* *The clowns arrive **at noon** ; Hortense showed up **on Saturday** .*

### 4.9.2 `ASS` The Assessive Case {#Sec4_9_2}

The **ASSESSIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **aö** **’ ** (realized as - **a** **’** **ö** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies the increment of space or time or unit by which a contextual ratio of measurement is created, e.g., *He charges **by the minute** ; It travels at 90 kilometers **per hour** ; He earns $25 **per book*** ; *The permitted allotment is two children **per clown*** .

**elesa kšila’ö**

child’-DPX-THM ‘clown’-**ASS**

*‘a pair of children per clown’*

### 4.9.3 `PER` The Periodic Case {#Sec4_9_3}

The **PERIODIC** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **eo** **’ ** (realized as - **e** **’** **o** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies the span of time / time frame at some point(s) during which, separate events, repetitions, or durationally segmented acts or states take place. Examples would be *He wrote the novel * ***in/over six months*** *; These clowns can corrupt your child * ***within a few days*** *; The woman has been ill a lot * ***this year*** *; * ***For the last several concerts*** *, my voice has been deteriorating* .

**Řese’o yeirčá kšivo wiole. **

’24.hour.day’-CSV-DPX-**PER ** RPV-‘corrupt’-RTR-OBS ‘clown’-N-ERG ‘child’-N-ABS

*‘It takes two days for a clown to corrupt a child.’*

### 4.9.4 `PRO` The Prolapsive Case {#Sec4_9_4}

The **PROLAPSIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **eö** **’ ** (realized as - **e** **’** **ö** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies the duration of an act, condition, or event, i.e., how long it takes or lasts, e.g., *He prayed * ***through lunch*** *, It rained * ***all night*** *, It took ****three days**** for the fever to break, She sang * ***for an hour*** .

**Wellyawá urwale’ö**

‘sing.a.song’-RTR-OBS ‘hour’-**PRO**

*‘They sang for an hour.’*

### 4.9.5 `PCV` The Precursive Case {#Sec4_9_5}

The **PRECURSIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **oë** **’ ** (realized as - **o** **’** **ë** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies an entity acting as a point in time prior to which an act, condition, or event occurs, e.g., *‘this city **before the war**’* , *‘a presentation **preceding the banquet**’.*

### 4.9.6 `PCR` The Postcursive Case {#Sec4_9_6}

The **POSTCURSIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **öe** **’ ** (realized as - **ö** **’** **e** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies an entity acting as a point in time after which, following which, subsequent to which, an act, state, or event occurs, e.g., *‘this city **after the war**’* , *‘a presentation **following the banquet**’, ‘It’s been a long time **since I danced**’.*

### 4.9.7 `ELP` The Elapsive Case {#Sec4_9_7}

The **ELAPSIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **oe** **’ ** (realized as - **o** **’e** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies the amount of time that has passed or is expected to pass between the contextual present and the time of the act, condition, or event being spoken of. It corresponds to English ‘…ago’ or ‘...from now’. Examples would be ***Four years ag******o*** *I was a student; * ***Going back three generations*** *, women could not even vote* ; ***Four years from now*** *, I will be a student; * ***Looking ahead three generations*** *, clowns will rule the world; I will be home * ***in three days*** *; Little did he know that ****two months later*** * he’d be a rich man* . The past vs. future distinction is determined from context, any aspectual morphology, or may be specified with the TPP affix (see [**Chapter 7 on** **Affixes**](07) regarding how to structure a Slot V or Slot VII affix).

### 4.9.8 `PLM` The Prolimitive Case {#Sec4_9_8}

The **PROLIMITIVE** case is marked by the `Vc` affix - **oa** **’ ** (realized as - **o** **’a** ) in formative Slot IX. It identifies the spatio-temporal boundary point of a span of time or space during which or within which something is expected to or must occur or be situated. Equivalent to English phrases: *by the end of / within the period ending in / within the period ending with / before X is over / before X is u p / inside of (the period signified by)*’. Examples: *I expect you to apologize **by the time/before dinner is over*** ; *If the clowns are going to leave, it had better be **before the children’s arrival** .*

## 4.10 Case-Scope {#Sec4_10}

Formatives showing Case use the Case-Scope affix **`Cn`** in Slot VIII to indicate the scope of the case-marked formative over adjacent formatives. This is useful when there is a string of cases modifying another “base” formative; **`Cn`** specifies which has scope over which other formative.

Note that the **`Cn`** affix in Slot VIII is the same affix that shows Mood in verbal formatives (i.e., verbs), described in [**Sec. 5.2**](05#Sec5_2). The determination as to whether a formative is a noun or verb can be made by its syllabic stress pattern. In contrast to verbal formatives which are stressed on the final syllable of the word, nominal formatives are stressed on the penultimate (i.e., second-to-last) syllable, and framed verbal formatives are stressed on the antepenultimate (third-to last) syllable. Only the latter two show Case-Scope in slot VIII. This is explained in detail in [**Sec. 6.2.1**](06#Sec6_2_1).

**`Cn` Case-Scope values**

**SPECIAL NOTE:** A noun in one of the Appositive or Relational Cases adjacent to another noun operates as an exception to the above rules. Because such Appositive or Relational nouns naturally associate with an adjacent noun, default zero-marking on such a noun will be assumed to convey **CCP** status if the Appositive/Associative/Relational noun is the first of a pair of nouns, or **CCV** if it is the second of the pair. If there are three consecutive zero-marked Appositive/Relational formatives, the first noun will be assumed to convey **CCP** status, while the other two have **CCV** status.

## 4.11 Introduction to Case-Accessor Affixes and Case-Stacking Affixes {#Sec4_11}

Each one of the sixty-eight cases has a corresponding Case-Accessor Affix, an Inverse Case-Accessor Affix, and a Case-Stacking Affix. Case-Accessors are explained immediately below. Case-stacking is explained in Sec. 4.11.2.

### 4.11.1 Case-Accessors and Inverse Case-Accessors {#Sec4_11_1}

The purpose of Case-Accessor and Inverse Case-Accessor affixes is to be able to assign/label a formative as being a specific party to a particular case-relationship. Examples of this are shown in the following table for the nine Transrelative Cases:

Because Case-Accessor and Inverse Case-Accessor affixes are structured the same as standard `VxCs` affixes in formative Slots V and VII, their phonological structure and full list of the affixes with examples is presented in [**Sec. 7.6**](07#Sec7_6) at the end of the chapter on `VxCs` affixes.

### 4.11.2 Case-Stacking {#Sec4_11_2}

Case-stacking refers to the ability to assign two cases simultaneously to a formative (or to a case-frame). This is necessary to accurately translate sentences like the following:

*‘I jog every day except during (an) illness.’*

Examining the above sentence, the phrase “except (for) X” is expressed by the CONVERSIVE case (see [**Sec. 4.5.8**](04#Sec4_5_8)), while the idea of “during X” by the CONCURSIVE case ([**Sec. 4.9.1**](04#Sec4_9_1)). This requires that two different cases to the formative translating ‘illness’, unless we instead resort to expressing the sentence paraphrastically as *‘I jog every day except that I don’t jog during illness.’*

To allow for two (or more) cases to be assigned to the same formative (or case-frame), the base case of the formative is shown as usual by `Vc` in Slot IX, while the case to be “stacked” upon the base case is expressed by a case-stacking affix. Like Case-Accessor affixes, Case-Stacking affixes are structured the same as standard `VxCs` affixes in formative Slots V and VII. Their phonological structure and full list of the affixes with examples is presented in [**Sec. 7.6.4**](07#Sec7_6_4) at the end of the chapter on `VxCs` affixes.
