---
title: 10 特殊构造 Special Constructions
---

## 10.0 特殊构造 {#Sec10}

This chapter provides details on certain specialized grammatical constructions by which the languages conveys certain kinds of information. Most of these specialized constructions constitute alternative or “short-cut” means of expressing more long-winded “standard” constructions, although some represent standard expressions in and of themselves.

## 10.1 Concatenation and Format {#Sec10_1}

Many languages, including English, are able to combine two separate meanings into a single verb, a process termed conflation . This is illustrated in the following English sentences:

1. *He bicycled south. = *He traveled south by bicycle.
2. *She dolled herself up* . = She made herself look as pretty as a doll.
3. *They’re shelving the books* . = They’re putting the books on the shelf/shelves.
4. *Slide me a beer* . = Give me a beer by sliding it (e.g., along the bar).

The above sentences show four verbs which respectively carry inherent senses of vector movement, transformation, positioning/placement, and giving. The patterning of such “conflated” verbs is usually random and haphazard in any given language. For example, the English *to bicycle* in sentence (1) means ‘to travel by means of bicycle,’ not ‘to make a bicycle’ or ‘to be a bicycle.’ On the other hand, the verb *to doll up* does not mean to ‘travel by doll,’ but rather ‘to make appear like a doll.’ Yet, *to shelve* means ‘to place on a shelf,’ not ‘to travel by means of shelves’ or ‘to make appear like a shelf.’ And none of the verbs in the first three sentences connotes the idea of giving or conveyance as does *slide* in sentence (4).

As can be seen, verb conflation is essentially a “short-cut” way of combining an unspoken primary verbal sense (such as movement, transformation, placement, giving, etc.) with an overtly expressed verb that conveys a secondary sense such as means, manner, or location. This can be formally notated for our four sentences above as follows:

He [1: (TRAVEL+past tense) south] [2: (BY-MEANS-OF) bicycle] = He bicycled south* .

She [1: (CAUSE-TO-RESEMBLE+past tense+reflexive)] [2: (IN-THE-MANNER-OF) doll] = She dolled herself up* .

They [1: (PUT+progressive) the books] [2: (TO-LOCATION-OF) shelves] = They’re shelving the books* .

[1: (GIVE+imperative)] a beer [2: (BY-MEANS-OF) sliding] to me = Slide me a beer* .

Note that the particular unspoken covert and overt senses (shown by the numerals 1 and 2 in the above analyses) are specific to any given verb and must be subjectively learned by the listener, i.e., a speaker of English must learn that *to hand* means to GIVE by MEANS of one’s hand, but *to shoulder* does not mean to GIVE by MEANS of one’s shoulder.

Thus, while conflation of verbs presents a potential opportunity for instantiating verbs with patterns of overt and covert meaning, the lack of systemization prevents one from knowing with certainty what pattern to use when attempting to interpret the usage of a verb form.

New Ithkuil systemizes verb conflation into a productive scheme, in which any formative can be concatenated directly with another formative (termed the parent formative). The operational sense of the concatenated formative and its semantic relation to the parent formative is conveyed by its case-affix in Slot IX. The concatenated formative is placed immediately preceding the parent formative, and is structured as a regular formative, able to take any and all morphology as appropriate and semantically permissible for the concatenated pair as a whole. The concatenated formative also shows one of the following eight `Cc` values in Slot I to indicate that it and the following formative constitute a concatenated pair. The meaning of the different `Cc` values is explained below the table.

| | Slot IX = `Vf` | plus w-form of `Ca` shortcut* | plus y-form of `Ca` shortcut* |
| ------ | ----- | --- | --- |
| Type-1 Concatenation | h | hl | hm |
| Type-2 Concatenation | hw | hr | hn |

 * See Sec. 3.10 for an explanation of thew - and y - `Ca` shortcuts
Format: Note that for a concatenated formative, the Slot IX case affix is labeled `Vf` rather than `Vc` to stand for the term Format . Although `Vf` affixes are the same as `Vc` case affixes and represent the same 68 noun cases from Chapter 4 above, the term Format rather than Case is used to differentiate the fact that the case relationship is performing a different function. Specifically, the Format specifies the semantic relationship the concatenated formative has *with the immediately-following parent formative* , as opposed to signifying any case relationship it has to the rest of the sentence (which is the purpose of the Slot IX `Vc` /`Vk` affix in the parent formative).
Alternate `Vf` Indicator: Concatenated formatives do not use a glottal-stop in the Slot IX `Vf` form for Cases 37 through 68 (i.e., the Relational, Affinitive, Spatio-Temporal I, or Spatio-Temporal II cases). Instead, the concatenated formative takes ultimate syllabic stress to indicate that the Slot IX `Vf` Format vowel is actually a Format 37-through-68 form but without the glottal stop. Also, both Case No. 1 (THM) and Case No. 37 (PRN) can elide their - a - phonological marker; the latter only as long as the resulting word bears ultimate syllabic stress and is not mono-syllabic. Before eliding the - a -, External Juncture requirements as per [Sec. 11.8](http://ithkuil.net/newithkuil_11_syntax.htm#Sec11_8) must be taken into account. A monosyllabic concatenated formative is to be interpreted as an unframed nominal formative bearing THM case (whereas a monosyllabic parent or standalone formative is interpreted as a verbal formative).

### 10.1.1 Concatenation Type {#Sec10_1_1}

As seen in the above table, there are two types of concatenation. Type-1 concatenation implies a circumstantial relationship between the concatenated formative and the parent (equivalent to placing the concatenated formative into a case-frame). Type-2 concatenation is derivational (i.e., lexicalizing), creating a new lexico-semantic gestalt usually requiring a different English translation. This is analogous to English forms like *polar bear* naming a new animal rather than stating a location. Likewise, English *elephant seal* establishes a new lexico-semantic gestalt rather than describing some sort of metaphorical relationship between elephants and seals.
10.1.2 `Ca` Shortcut Indicator for Concatenated Formative

Columns 2 and 3 of the above table are used if the Slot IV `Vr` value is default - a - (STA/BSC/EXS) and the Slot VI `Ca` affix is one of eight specific `Ca` values shown for Slot II as previously described in [Sec. 3.10](http://ithkuil.net/newithkuil_03_morphology.htm#Sec3_10).
10.1.3 Concatenation Chain

More than two formatives may be concatenated to form the equivalent of phrasal concatenation or a concatenation chain. The initial concatenated formative of the chain indicates the Concatenation Type (1 or 2) for the entire chain; all subsequent concatenated formatives of the chain take one of the Type-1 `Cc` values from the table above. The final parent formative of the chain has either empty Slot I or takes w - or y - in Slot I if a `Ca` shortcut is present (see [Sec. 3.10](http://ithkuil.net/newithkuil_03_morphology.htm#Sec3_10)).
10.1.4 Romanized Orthography for Concatenated Formatives

In addition to the presence of a `Cc` affix in Slot I of a concatenated formative, the two (or more) formatives are joined by a hyphen in the language’s romanization scheme as a simple mnemonic indicator that they are a concatenated pair or concatenated chain.
10.1.5 Examples of Concatenated Formatives in Use
Hlellwoehú-alxwädé hla Siryus afthili’a elneda’o.

 [ default `Ca` ] /CONCATENATED*-* STEM2/PRC :‘be.bright’-SPL-RLT-PARENT:‘state.of.star.shining’-CTE-PRX-PUP CARRIER ‘Sirius’ ‘sky’-OBJ-*[* *default `Ca` ]-* LOC STEM2/PRC-‘nighttime’-CSV-PRX-CNR

*‘Sirius is the brightest star in the night sky.’*
Hlaçköé-yeřdö’e arţtudeuyá kšilu ažtwa’ra.

 [ default `Ca` ]- CONCATENATED:PRC- ‘illness’-PCR-PARENT:PRX-STEM2/PRC-‘recuperate’-PCR ‘study’-DYN-PRX-RGR-OBS ‘clown’-OBJ-*[* *default `Ca` ]-* IND ‘poison’-G-PRN

*‘After recovering from an illness, the clown got back to studying poisons.’*
Ätruleowá dře Hakšivé-Warswi’a.

CPT-‘translative.motion’-DYN- *[* *default `Ca` ]-* CUL-OBS 2p+1m/DET-ABS CONCATENATED:‘clown’-OBJ-N-COR-PARENT:*[* *default `Ca` ]-* PRC-‘planet’-LOC

*‘We eventually wound up on the Clown Planet.’*
Hlešvie-galoktähá pra’i.

 CONCATENATED/[ default `Ca` ]:STEM2/PRC-‘self-involved.leisure.activity’-PUR+PARENT:‘ambulation’-[default `Ca` ]-TPP₁/7-PRL- FAC*-OBS* ma/BEN+1m/BEN-ACT*

*‘She and I are (planning on) taking a walk later on’.*

## 10.2 The Carrier Root {#Sec10_2}

Proper nouns such as personal and place names, as well as words from other languages are morpho-phonologically incompatible with New Ithkuil’s slot-based agglutinative morphology, as such names and foreign words might easily be mistaken for homophonous or nearly-homophonous New Ithkuil words, giving rise to semantic nonsense. Nevertheless, such words can be morphologically manipulated like any other Ithkuil formative by means of the “carrier” root -S- . By placing proper nouns and foreign words/phrases immediately following one of the three stems of the carrier root, a listener/reader is signaled by the morphology that the word is not to be interpreted as a New Ithkuil formative, adjunct, or referential.

| -S - [the “carrier” root] |
| ----- |
| |
| BSC |
| CTE |
| CSV |
| OBJ |

The carrier stem is placed immediately before the proper noun or foreign word or phrase, then declined or conjugated normally for any desired morphological categories, even verbal categories. The proper noun or foreign word or phrase itself is left unchanged. The non-Ithkuil word or phrase is pronounced with either high or rising tone on its last syllable, in order to clue the listener that the following syllable/word returns to being Ithkuil. Alternately, the end of the word or phrase can be signaled by the use of the CAR register adjunct (explained in [Sec. 8.3](http://ithkuil.net/newithkuil_08_adjuncts.htm#Sec8_3))

The carrier root in front of the names of persons also serves to function as a title of address corresponding to English *Mister* , Ms. or *Miss* . There is no distinction of gender or marital status conveyed by the term.

If the proper noun or foreign word/phrase is already known to the listener/addressee, instead of utilizing a carrier stem, the speaker can instead employ the carrier adjunct (see [Sec. 8.4.1](http://ithkuil.net/newithkuil_08_adjuncts.htm#Sec8_4_1))

## 10.3 Specialized `Cs` -Roots in Lieu of Affix-Scoping Adjuncts {#Sec10_3}

In the absence of a convenient semantic root, or as an alternative to using Affixual Adjuncts (see [Sec. 8.1](http://ithkuil.net/newithkuil_08_adjuncts.htm#Sec8_1)), a special formative structure, the Specialized `Cs` -Root , exists to raise a `VxCs` affix to the level of a root. This formative structure operates like a standard formative except that Slots II and IV take specialized `Vv` and `Vr` forms and the Slot III `Cr` form is replaced by the `Cs` -form of a `VxCs` affix. The specifics are as follows:
Slot II `Vv` Values Indicating a Specialized `Cs` -Root* (i.e., that Slots III + IV constitute a `CsVx` affix)

| Version | `Vv` | These four specialized`Vv` values signal that the following consonantal form in Slot III is not a `Cr` form from the Lexicon, but rather the `Cs` -form of a `VxCs` affix. This functions to convert the meaning of the `VxCs` affix to the status of a lexical root. Due to this conversion into a root, no Type-1 vs. Type-2 affixual distinction is made. |
| ------ | ------ | -- |
| STA Function | DYN Function | |
| PRC | ëi | eë |
| CPT | ëu | oë |

Note that such specialized `Cs` -roots do not take Slot I `Cc` values indicating Slot IV/VI a+`Ca` shortcuts but can take the four Slot I `Cc` values that indicate concat-enation only (see [Sec. 10.1](10#Sec10_1) on Concatenation): h -, hw -, plus these two forms with ultimate stress.

The Affix-Degree and Specification of the Specialized `Cs` -root is shown by the `Vr` value in Slot IV:

 Slot IV `Vr` Values for the Specialized `Cs` -Root (showing Affix-degree for the Slot III `Cs` -form plus Specification)

| Affix Degree | Context | Note that, unlike Slot IV of standard formatives, all nine tiers of the Standard Vowel Sequence are utilized in these Specialized`Cs` -roots. As the category of Specification does not apply to `VxCs` affixes, these Specialized `Cs` -roots are considered to have BSC Specification only. | |
| ------ | - | ------ | ----- |
| EXS | FNC | RPS | AMG |
| 1 | a | ai | ia / uä |
| 2 | ä | au | ie / uë |
| 3 | e | ei | io / üä |
| 4 | i | eu | iö / üë |
| 5 | ëi | ëu | eë |
| 6 | ö | ou | uö / öë |
| 7 | o | oi | uo / öä |
| 8 | ü | iu | ue / ië |
| 9 | u | ui | ua / iä |
| 0 | ae | ea | üo |

Examples:
Oërmölá wuřkoswu zvalau.

 `Cs` -Root: ITN₁/6- *[* *default `Ca` ]-* OBS ‘own’-ACCESSOR:ERG ‘dog’- *[* *default `Ca` ]-* PRP

*‘The dog’s owner has returned.’*
Iuprulövḑuadnó walxu ëivḑilamki’a lei.

STEM3/CPT/NEG₁/4-‘descend’-DYN-ASC₁/6-OGC³/9-CVN *[* *default `Ca` ]-* PRC-‘Sol’-IND `Cs` -Root: ASC₁/4-FGN₂/1-LOC 1m-GEN

*‘They say down south the sun won’t set on my home town.’*

## 10.4 Specialized Personal-Reference Roots {#Sec10_4}

Another type of special formative structure is the Specialized Personal-Reference Root. This structure operates like a standard formative except that Slot II takes specialized `Vv` values which indicate that the immediately following Slot III `Cr` form has been replaced by a Single-Referent Referential affix (see [Sec. 9.1](09#Sec9_1_1)), including combination Referential “clusters” such as - sml - *‘you(sg.), s/he/they(sg.) and I’ * . The specifics are as follows:

 Slot II `Vv` Values Indicating a Specialized Personal-Reference Root (i.e., Slot III constitutes a Personal-Reference Affix)

| Version | `Vv` | Slot IV values for these Specialized Personal-Reference roots are the same as for standard formatives, showing Function, Specification, and Context for the personal-referent. Referential clusters requiring an epenthetic -ë - vowel cannot be used in these Specialized Personal-Reference roots. |
| - | ------- | ------- |
| PRC | ae | |
| CPT | ea | |
NOTE: Specialized Personal-Reference roots can take Slot I `Cc` values indicating Slot IV/VI a+`Ca` shortcuts; however, because - ae - and - ea - are the only the two values allowed in Slot II, the only a+`Ca` shortcuts available are `Ca` = [default] and `Ca` = PRX .
Also: because the Referential affixes themselves refer to personal referents irrespective of number, the meaning of each stem of the Specialized Personal-Reference Root changes depending on its Perspective, as previously discussed in Sec. 4.6. Therefore, one should not attach the usual NOMIC affix - ç - / - x - or the ABSTRACT affix -w / -y to the Referential affix itself (as when using a Referential); instead, show NOMIC or ABSTRACT personal-reference forms using the appropriate `Ca` Perspective value in Slot VI of the formative.
Specifications and Verbal Meaning: Because they are full roots, these Specialized Personal-Reference root require that a meaning be assigned to the four Specifications, as well as meanings assigned to verbal forms. These are illustrated below for the 1m MONADIC speaker category:

| | STEM 1 Nominal meaning | STEM 1 Verbal meaning |
| ------ | - | -- |
| BASIC | ‘I (myself)’ | ‘to be me/to be myself’, ‘to do/act what/how I do [because it’s me]’ |
| CONTENTIAL | ‘I (myself)’ (as being my personality, mind, psyche, sentient thoughts, psychological sense of individuality, or “essence”; irrespective of my physical body)’ | [same as above applied to CONTENTIAL meaning at left] |
| CONSTITUTIVE | ‘I (myself)’ (as my physical body/embodiment/person, irrespective of personality, mind, psyche, sentient thoughts, psychological sense of individuality, or “essence”)’ | [same as above applied to CONSTITUTIVE meaning at left] |
| OBJECTIVE | ‘entity with/on which I act or with which I associate (i.e., place, thing, person, etc. with/in/on which/whom I [inter-]acts)’; ‘something/someone from/in my life/niche/environment’ | ‘to be an entity in my life/niche/environment; to be something/someone that/who is in my life/niche/environment’ |
10.5 Use of Type-3 `VxCs` Affix Format and Standard Vowel-Sequence Column 4 Vowels as Shortcut for Referentials

If either of a formative’s `VxCs` affix slots, Slots V or VII, are empty, then that empty slot may be used to show a specialized short-cut “personal reference affix.” The affix consists of a `Cs` consonant that is any one of the 30 Referential consonant-forms from the table in [Sec. 9.1](09#Sec9_1_1), combined with is a standard Type-3 `Vx` vowel-form corresponding to the nine `Vx` affix-degrees shown below. It is the appearance of a lone Type-3 `VxCs` affix without any adjacent Type-1 or Type-2 affix for it to apply to, that triggers its interpretation as this specialized personal reference affix.

Additionally, Column 4 vowel-forms from the Standard Vowel-Sequence may be employed as shortcuts for the Transrelative cases regardless of other `VxCs` affixes being present in the same Slot.
 Slot V or VII `Vx` Values Indicating a Referential Shortcut

| can only be used if no other`VxCs` affix is in the same Slot | | can be used regardless of other`VxCs` affixes present |
| -- | -- | --- |
| Degree 1 | ia / uä | POSSESSIVE case |
| Degree 2 | ie / uë | PROPRIETIVE case |
| Degree 3 | io / üä | GENITIVE case |
| Degree 4 | iö / üë | ATTRIBUTIVE case |
| Degree 5 | eë | PRODUCTIVE case |
| Degree 6 | uö / öë | INTERPRETATIVE case |
| Degree 7 | uo / öä | ORIGINATIVE case |
| Degree 8 | ue / ië | INTERDEPENDENT case |
| Degree 9 | ua / iä | PARTITIVE case |

## 10.6 Equivalents to English WH-Questions {#Sec10_6}

There are various equivalent constructions available to form the equivalent of an English WH-question. One method is to not ask a question at all, but rather to use a verb such as ‘state’ or ‘say/tell’ in DIRECTIVE Illocution to express a command that the addressee provide the information being sought, i.e, *‘Tell me your name’ *as opposed to *‘What is your name?’* Another equivalent to WH-questions is to use the PVS Referential in conjunction with the IVL₁/4 affix -inļ indicating INTERROGATIVE Illocution so that the PVS Referential functions much like an English interrogative pronoun. Examples:
Mmiexinļ *‘Why? * [i.e., For what purpose?]’

 Mma’oxinļ ‘When?’*
Nnioxinļ *‘To/for whose benefit? / To the benefit of what?’* ,
Ňňeöxinļ ‘Resulting (detrimentally) in what? / With what undesirable result?’*
Mmauxinļ* ‘Whose? / Belonging to what?’*

Finally, one can form the equivalent of WH-questions using INTERROGATIVE Illocution in conjunction with a formative affixed with Degrees 1, 2, 3, 8 or 9 of the PTN affix shown below. When used this way, the formative carrying the PTN affix must be marked as the semantic focus of the sentence (i.e., it must either immediately precede the verb in terms of word-order or it must carry the TPF/9 affix).
PTN Affix

| -sv | PTN Potential |
| ----- | ----- |
| 1 | whatever X is / whatever X may be |
| 2 | whatever X was or may have been (but is no more) |
| 3 | whatever X will be or may become (but is not yet) |
| 4 | ...or something like/similar to X in function, purpose, or consequence |
| 5 | ...or something like/similar to X in appearance/description |
| 6 | and whatever else X may be(come) |
| 7 | and whatever else X entails or carries with it as a consequence |
| 8 | which(ever) X (it is or may be) [i.e., of a known/limited number of possible identifications available to assign to X, the one identification that actually is (chosen as) X] |
| 9 | what(ever) X (it is or may be) [i.e., of an unknown number of possible identifications one might/could assign to X, the one identification that actually is (chosen as) X] |

Examples:
Weilüsve erčuléi kšilo?* *‘Which of the children did the clown corrupt?’*

 Laluţkusvu utxoléi akftyäloë? *‘What kind of person drinks ammonia?*

## 10.7 *Using Case on UNFRAMED Verbal Formatives {#Sec10_7}

Using the case-stacking affix (see [Sec. 7.6](http://ithkuil.net/newithkuil_07_affixes.htm#Sec7_6)), a noun-case can be placed on an UNFRAMED verbal formative to give a meaning of “to be (something that is) X” where X is the formative modified by the case’s function. Such constructions can often substitute for case-frames. Examples:

DEPENDENT case: Abẓe willyothoilyá utplaliör . *‘My self-esteem is dependent upon (my) singing this song well.’*

POSTCURSIVE case: A hrelu-azčojhaillöelyá . *‘It was after the child pulled a tantrum.’*

Intralinear analysis: RTR Type2.concatenated.root:‘person’-Stem2-IND - parent.root:Stem1-‘self-centered.behavior’-DYN/CSV-CRL₂/1-default.`Ca` -PCR-ASR/OBS

TRANSFORMATIVE case: Kšölaölwáu wele . *‘The child is hereby transformed into a clown!’* (more literally: *‘It is transformation into a clown that is declared to happen to the child!’ * )

## 10.8 Equivalent to English “Strings” of Adverbial Locative Particles {#Sec10_8}

English has the seemingly unique ability to create succinct “moving images” of complex trajectories, paths, treks, and in-situ movements by simple juxtaposition of locative/directional particles (i.e., prepositions acting mostly as adverbial particles). For example , imagine the manager of a basement nightclub talking to a friend on the sidewalk outside his club. He invites the friend to the balcony outside the back of the club, which one gets to by descending into the club, going past the dance floor, up a flight of stairs, then along a hallway to the back door. He does so by saying the following sentence to his friend, containing a string of nine prepositions (the first eight of which are functioning as adverbial particles):

*‘Come on down inside, up along through out back to the balcony.’*

New Ithkuil allows a speaker to create similar succinct “moving images”. Each motion root (whether referring to in-situ or translative motion) has a corresponding -`VxCs` affix of the same form (e.g., for the root - KR - ‘OBLIQUE LINEAR MOTION’, there is a corresponding suffix - kr ). Each of these affixes has the following nine degrees:

| 1 | Motion through X. Specifically, interior perlative motion/movement in a manner described by the suffix’s corresponding root among/within an external/surrounding/underlying (quasi-)static medium. For translative motion suffixes, implies motion along a course described by the suffix’s corresponding root where the course is set, determined, or prescribed by an externally surrounding/underlying medium/channel, etc. |
| - | ------ |
| 2 | Motion like X, inside something. Specifically, interior motion/movement: in-situ or translative movement/motion in a manner described by the suffix’s corresponding root while inside another entity (where, unlike Degree 1, the exterior object/entity does not define/prescribe/determine the course of the moving object/entity. |
| 3 | Motion into X. Implies entry from an exterior space/medium/context into an interior space/medium/context |
| 4 | Motion like X; for translative motion suffixes, motion along X. Implies continued/continuous movement in a manner described by the suffix’s corresponding root; for translative motion suffixes, implies continued/continuous motion along a course/direction described by the suffix’s corresponding root |
| 5 | Motion like X from one point (across) to another. Implies a single motion in a manner described by the suffix’s corresponding root from one point/side of the contextual space to another; for translative motion suffixes, implies a single motion along a course/direction described by the suffix’s corresponding root across a gap/gulf/space from one place to another. |
| 6 | Translative Motion = move onward; Positional: X/Y/Z position of X. For translative motion affixes, signifies motivational “on” as in “come on”, “go on”, “move on” - implies/reinforces need/impetus to begin/keep moving in the manner or direction described by the suffix’s corresponding root without stopping. For static positional affixes, operates merely as a locative to specify an entity’s X/Y/Z position. |
| 7 | Motion out of X. Implies exit from an interior space/medium/context out to an exterior space/medium/context |
| 8 | Motion like X, on the outside of something. exterior motion/movement: in-situ or translative movement/motion in a manner described by the suffix’s corresponding root while outside another object/entity (where, unlike Degree 9, the other object/entity does not define/prescribe/determine the course of the moving object/entity |
| 9 | Motion alongside X. Specifically, exterior perlative motion/movement outside of, over, next to, alongside, “above”/”under” an adjacent (quasi-)static surface/medium; for translative motion suffixes, implies motion on a course described by the suffix’s corresponding root along, over, parallel to, around, “above”/”under”, or tracking/following an adjacent (quasi-)static surface/medium |

For Degree 6, the various Modulative suffixes as well as Phase can be used to describe repeated, ongoing movement/motion, e.g., back-and-forth, to-and-fro, side-to-side, up-and-down, in-and-out, out-and-back, etc.

Besides movement/motion Roots, roots denoting any spatial referent/area also have corresponding affix-forms utilizing this pattern, e.g., front side, rear area, top area/space, area below/underneath, etc.
Translative Motion Roots: Roots involving translative motion are modeled after the following basic root:

| -TR - ‘PATH-ORIENTED, QUASI-LINEAR TRANSLATIVE MOTION’ Affix: M01 |
| --- |
| |
| BSC |
| CTE |
| CSV |
| OBJ |

Roots (and suffixes) following the same model as - TR - above include the following:

- PR - ‘VERTICAL QUASI-LINEAR TRANSLATIVE MOTION’, i.e., movement up/down; Stem 2 = ‘ascent/ascend; going (straight) up; rise/raise/elevate’; Stem 3 = ‘descent/descend; going (straight) down; “drop”; lower(ing)’
- KR - ‘OBLIQUE VERTICAL QUASI-LINEAR MOTION’, i.e., ascending/descending at an angle/slant’; Stem 2 = oblique ascent, upward incline, uphill; Stem 3 = oblique descent, downward incline, downhill
- DR - ‘HORIZONTAL PLANAR TRANSLATIVE MOTION’, i.e., movement along a line/path on a horizontal plane between the topical referent and a second location; Stem 2 = ‘approach, getting nearer’; Stem 3 = ‘recede/receding, getting farther away’
- FR - ‘PARALLEL TRANSLATIVE MOTION’, i.e., movement along same path/trajectory as the topical referent; Stem 1 = parallel movement in same direction alongside topical referent; Stem 2 = parallel movement alongside but in opposite direction to topical referent
- BR - ‘PERPENDICULAR-PLANAR TRANSLATIVE MOTION’, i.e., movement along a line/path “across” one’s forward path or field of vision, moving laterally (i.e., horizontally perpendicular) to the positional/orientational position or path of the topical referent (i.e., analogous to watching something moving in a line across a screen held in front of one’s eyes); Stem 2 = movement from left-to-right relative to the topical referent; Stem 3 = movement from right-to-left relative to the topical referent.
- GR - ‘OBLIQUE LATERAL TRANSLATIVE MOTION’, i.e., moving laterally at an oblique angle on same horizontal plane as the topical referent; Stem 2 = lateral movement at an oblique angle approaching (i.e., getting nearer to) the topical referent; Stem 3 = lateral movement at an oblique angle moving away from (getting farther away from) the topical referent.
- GL - ‘HORIZONTAL-PLANAR RANGE OF MOTION’, i.e., random directed movement within/throughout a 2-dimensional horizontal plane.
- DL - ‘VERTICAL-PLANAR RANGE OF MOTION’, i.e., random directed movement within/throughout a 2-dimensional vertical plane.
- KL - ‘PERPENDICULAR-PLANAR RANGE OF MOTION’, i.e., random directed movement within/throughout a 2-dimensional vertical plane perpendicular to the perspective of the topical referent (i.e., lying “across” one’s visual field or directional path, analogous to a painting or flat screen held up in front of a person).
- PL - ‘TRANSLATIVE MOTION ALONG PARABOLIC/ARC-LIKE TRAJECTORY RELATIVE TO GRAVITY’
- BL - ‘MOTION IN A CURVE’
- FL - ‘MOTION IN A PLANAR CIRCULAR PATH’ [Stem 2 refers to counter-clockwise motion and Stem 3 to clockwise motion, relative to the speaker/observer]
- TL - ‘GENERIC/OBLIQUE 3-DIMENSIONAL RANGE OF MOTION’, i.e., 3-D pervasive movement throughout or within a volume of space

NOTE: When using the affix-form of the above fourteen roots, to specify the Stem 2 meaning of the respective root, add -w to the affix form, e.g., -tr becomes - trw , -kl becomes - klw . To specify the Stem 3 meaning of the respective root, add -y to the affix form, e.g., -tr becomes - try , -kl becomes - kly .

Spatial Position/Location Roots

| -Ţ - ‘SPATIAL POSITION, LOCATION, ORIENTATION, DIRECTION’ Affix: P01 | STEM 2: Direction relative to the observer (i.e., linear directional path between an object and the observer) STEM 3: Area, general vicinity of a particular position/location relative to the observer, whether 2-dimensional or 3-dimensional according to the situational context |
| --- | ------ |
| BSC | STEM 1: spatial position of an entity; to be situated/located at |
| CTE | The act of physically occupying a/the position/location in space; to physically occupy a/the position in space |
| CSV | A/the position/location in space occupied by an entity; to be a/the position/location in space |
| OBJ | The entity situated/located at; to be that which is situated/located at |

Roots following the same model as - Ţ - above include the following based on a 3-dimensional X/Y/Z axial grid:

- Ḑ - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / 0 / 0’, i.e., “right here”; at the center point of the observer’s 3-dimensional spatial frame of reference.
- ŢY - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / 0 / +Z’, ‘above the observer’
- ŢW - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / 0 / -Z’, ‘below the observer’
- P - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / +Y / 0’, ‘in front of the observer’
- K - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / -Y / 0’, ‘behind the observer’

-F ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / 0 / 0’, ‘to the right of the observer’

- V - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / 0 / 0’, ‘to the left of the observer’

For mnemonic convenience, combinations of the above positional concepts are designated by corresponding combinations of the phonemes of the above X/Y/Z roots (- ŢY - and - ŢW - are shortened to -Y and - W ):

- PY - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / +Y / +Z’, ‘in front of and above the observer’
- PW - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / +Y / -Z’, ‘in front of and below the observer’
- KY - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / -Y / +Z’, ‘behind and above the observer’
- KW - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / -Y / -Z’, ‘behind and below the observer’
- FP - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / +Y / 0’, ‘to the right and in front of the observer’
- FK - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / -Y / 0’, ‘to the right and behind the observer’
- FY - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / 0 / +Z’, ‘to the right and above the observer’
- FW - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / 0 / -Z’, ‘to the right and below the observer’
- VB - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / +Y / 0’, ‘to the left and in front of the observer’
- VG - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / -Y / 0’, ‘to the left and behind the observer’
- VY - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / 0 / +Z’, ‘to the left and above the observer’
- VW - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / 0 / -Z’, ‘to the left and below the observer’
- FPY - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / +Y / +Z’, ‘to the right, in front, and above the observer’

-FPW - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / +Y / -Z’, ‘to the right, in front, and below the observer’

- FKY - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / -Y / +Z’, ‘to the right, behind, and above the observer’
- FKW - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / -Y / -Z’, ‘to the right, behind, and below the observer’
- VBY - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / +Y / +Z’, ‘to the left, in front, and above the observer’
- VBW - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / +Y / -Z’, ‘to the left, in front, and below the observer’
- VGY - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / -Y / +Z’, ‘to the left, behind, and above the observer’
- VGW - ‘POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / -Y / -Z’, ‘to the left, behind, and below the observer’
- PK - ‘POSITION BETWEEN/AMIDST/AMONG [IN A QUASI-PLANAR CONTEXT]’, e.g., among others in a crowded room
- DK - ‘POSITION BETWEEN/AMONG [IN A LINEAR UNIDIMENSIONAL CONTEXT]’, e.g., between two others in a queue
- TK - ‘INDEFINITE POSITION AMIDST/AMONG [IN A 3-DIMENSIONAL VOLUME]’, e.g., among a sky full of balloonists
- ḐD - ‘POSITION/STATE INTERTWINED/INTERMINGLED/INTERMIXED IN 2-DIMENSIONAL PLANAR CONTEXT [INDIVIDUAL COMPONENTS SEPARABLE/EXTRACTABLE]’, e.g., the red marbles amidst a tabletop covered with different colored marbles
- ḐB - ‘POSITION/STATE INTERTWINED/INTERMINGLED/INTERMIXED IN 3-DIMENSIONAL VOLUME [INDIVIDUAL COMPONENTS SEPARABLE/EXTRACTABLE]’, e.g., the red marbles within a jar full of different colored marbles
- ḐV - ‘POSITION/STATE INTERTWINED/INTERMINGLED/INTERMIXED IN 2-DIMENSIONAL PLANAR CONTEXT [INDIVIDUAL COMPONENTS INSEPARABLE/PERMANENTLY COMBINED]’, e.g., yellow paint spread onto a blue canvas to make a green area
- ḐG - ‘POSITION/STATE INTERTWINED/INTERMINGLED/INTERMIXED IN 3-DIMENSIONAL VOLUME [INDIVIDUAL COMPONENTS INSEPARABLE/PERMANENTLY COMBINED]’, e.g., sugar granules poured into a cup of coffee
Positionally-Defined Componential Parts of a Whole

As seen above, Stem 3 of - F - type spatial position roots convey the meaning of “the area/vicinity around X”, so that the Stem 3 root of - K - above would mean “the area behind or in back (of)”. Nevertheless, separate roots exist to describe positionally-defined componential parts of an entity, to distinguish “the area behind or in back of” from “the rear/back part/side of” where the latter refers to a part of the entity itself. This allows one to distinguish phrases such as “behind the box” from “the back/rear side of the box.”

| -ŢF - ‘POSITIONALLY-DEFINED COMPONENTIAL PART’ Associated affix: - S08 - | STEM 2: Inalienable, inherent, inseparable, “built-in” component part/section in relation to the whole STEM 3: Alienable, separable, detachable component part/section in relation to the whole |
| ---- | --- |
| BSC | STEM 1: positionally-defined part/section of an entity (e.g., side, front, top, bottom, rear, etc.); to be a positionally-defined part/section of an entity |
| CTE | The state/act of physically being/doing what a positionally-defined part/section of an entity is/does; to physically bed/do what a positionally-defined part/section of an entity is/does |
| CSV | A/the (relative) spatial position/location which defines/delineates a part/section of an entity; to be a/the spatial position/location which defines/delineates a part/section of an entity |
| OBJ | The entity of which the componential part/section is a part; to be the entity of which the componential part/section is a part |

Roots (and affixes) following the same model as - ŢF - above are as follows:

- KF - ‘REAR/BACK PART OF AN ENTITY [RELATIVE TO ITS DIRECTIONAL ORIENTATION OR PRIMARY EXTERNAL INTERFACE]’
- DY - ‘TOP/PEAK/SUMMIT OF AN ENTITY [RELATIVE TO ITS TYPICAL ORIENTATION UNDER GRAVITY]’
- DW - ‘BOTTOM/FOUNDATION OF AN ENTITY [RELATIVE TO ITS TYPICAL ORIENTATION UNDER GRAVITY]’
- ḐY - ‘UPPER PART/“HALF” OF AN ENTITY [RELATIVE TO ITS TYPICAL ORIENTATION UNDER GRAVITY]’
- ḐW - ‘LOWER PART/“HALF” OF AN ENTITY [RELATIVE TO ITS TYPICAL ORIENTATION UNDER GRAVITY]’
- XW - ‘INTERIOR/INTERNAL VOLUME/“INSIDE(S)”/“INNARDS” OF AN ENTITY’
- CL - ‘LINEAR UNI-DIMENSIONAL MIDDLE, CENTER [AS SEEN PARALLEL TO LONG AXIS OF ENTITY (OR HEIGHT-AXIS OF A “TALL” ENTITY)]’
- CR - ‘LINEAR UNI-DIMENSIONAL MIDDLE, CENTER [AS SEEN PERPENDICULAR TO LONG AXIS OF ENTITY (OR HEIGHT-AXIS OF A “TALL” ENTITY)]’
- ẒL - ‘PLANAR 2-DIMENSIONAL MIDDLE, CENTER [RUNNING VERTICALLY AND LATERALLY PARALLEL TO LONG (OR TALL) SIDE OF ENTITY]’
- ẒR - ‘PLANAR 2-DIMENSIONAL MIDDLE, CENTER [RUNNING VERTICALLY PARALLEL BUT LATERALLY PERPENDICULAR TO LONG (OR TALL) SIDE OF ENTITY]’
- ẒW - ‘PLANAR 2-DIMENSIONAL MIDDLE, CENTER [RUNNING VERTICALLY AND LATERALLY PERPENDICULAR TO LONG (OR TALL) SIDE OF ENTITY]’
- CW - ‘CENTER POINT OF AN ENTITY, i.e., the zero-dimensional point most equidistant from all points on the periphery or surface of an entity
- FḐ - ‘SIDE/FLANK OF AN ENTITY’
- PF - ‘FRONT PART OF AN ENTITY [RELATIVE TO ITS DIRECTIONAL ORIENTATION OR PRIMARY EXTERNAL INTERFACE]’
- XL - ‘INTERIOR SURFACE OR “WALL” / INTERNAL SURFACE OR “WALL” / THE INSIDE SURFACE OR “WALL” OF AN ENTITY’
- XR - ‘EXTERIOR/EXTERNAL SURFACE/“OUTSIDE”/“SKIN” OF AN ENTITY’

The following roots are also modeled on the same root - ŢF -, even though they do not specify a particular spatial position relative to the whole:

- XḐ - ‘EXTERNAL POINT-LIKE OUTWARD-FACING VERTEX/“CORNER” OF AN ENTITY’
- XT - ‘EXTERNAL QUASI-LINEAR EDGE OF AN ENTITY
- XK - ‘EXTERNAL QUASI-LINEAR JOINING OF SURFACES/“SEAM” OF AN ENTITY’
- XF - ‘EXTERNAL ATTACHMENT POINT OR FASTENING MECHANISM OF AN ENTITY’, i.e., handle, hook, latch, velcro patch, knob, peg, etc.
- ČḐ - ‘INTERNAL POINT-LIKE INTERIOR VERTEX/“CORNER” OF AN ENTITY’
- XḐR - ‘EXTERNAL LINEAR OUTWARD-FACING “CORNER” EDGE OR “CORNER” SPACE OF AN ENTITY’
- ČḐR - ‘INTERNAL LINEAR INTERIOR “CORNER” EDGE OR “CORNER” SPACE OF AN ENTITY’

Examples:
Etrulökryekrwitrokfái *wakçmi’o.

STEM.2-PRC-‘translative.motion’-DYN-[* default `Ca` ]-M03 y₁/6 -M03 w₁/3 -M01 ₁/4 -S17 ₁/7 -DIR *[* *default `Ca` ]-* PRC-‘outdoor.balcony’-ALL

*‘Come on down inside, up along through out back to the balcony.’*
Hlurmiô-igulotruxröxḑuökfái.

[*default `Ca` ]/CONCATENATED:STEM.3-PRC-‘house’-ABL-PARENT:STEM.2-CPT-‘ambulate’-DYN-[* default `Ca` ]-M01 ₁/7 -S24 ₁/9 -S25 ₁/6 -S17 ³/6 -DIR

*‘Go run outside along the wall until you reach the back outside corner of the house.’*
