---
title: 06 More Verbal Morphology
---

## 6.0 Additional Verbal Morphology {#Sec6}

In addition to the five verbal categories shown in formative Slot VIII, as detailed in Chapter 5, there are two additional morphological categories that apply to verbal formatives — **Illocution** and **Validation**. These categories are shown by the vocalic `Vk` affix in Slot IX. Note that in Chapter 4 above, we’ve already seen that Slot IX is used for the `Vc` Case affix for nouns. The `Vk` affix for verbs uses the same vowel-forms as affixes as the `Vc` Case affix — the distinction as to whether an affix in Slot IX is `Vc` or `Vk` is determined by the syllabic stress of the word. If the word has ultimate stress (i.e., stress on the final syllable), the Slot IX value is `Vk` ; otherwise, it is a `Vc` Case marker. Sec. 6.1 below explains the categories of Illocution and Validation, while Sec. 6.1.3 below provides the Slot IX `Vk` affix values denoting these categories.

## 6.1 Illocution and Validation {#Sec6_1}

### 6.1.1 Illocution {#Sec6_1_1}

**Illocution** refers to the type of “speech act” being made by a speaker, i.e., the purpose of the statement in terms of how the addressee is to interpret either its truth-value, or its requirements/demands upon the speaker in terms of a physical and/or psychological response. There are nine Illocutions. Additionally, the first Illocution, ASSERTIVE, has eight sub-types relating to the evidentiary basis for the assertion (analyzed in Sec. 6.1.2 below under Validation).

::: tabs

@tab ASR

**ASSERTIVE**

The statement is an assertion/proposition about the world which constitutes a truth claim.

<ins>The ASSERTIVE is used to express propositions which purport to describe or name some act, event, or state in the real world, with the purpose of committing the hearer to the truth of the proposition. Thus, an utterance in the ASSERTIVE Illocution is one that can be believed or disbelieved, and is either true or false. Such utterances would include general statements, descriptions, and explanations.</ins>

@tab DIR

**DIRECTIVE**

The statement is either an imperative command to another party to do/be something, or a “commissive” statement committing the speaker to a specific state or course of action (i.e., a vow, promise, guarantee, etc.)

<ins>The DIRECTIVE Illocution is for the purpose of committing the hearer to undertake a course of action represented by the proposition, where the proposition describes a mental wish, desire, or intention on the part of the speaker. Thus, an utterance in the DIRECTIVE is one that is neither true nor false because it is not describing something that purports to exist in the real world; rather, it describes an act or situation which can potentially be made real, i.e., that can be fulfilled or carried out. Such utterances include commands, orders, and requests and would generally be marked in Western languages by either the imperative, optative, or subjunctive moods. The commitment on the part of the hearer is not belief or disbelief, but rather whether to obey, comply with, or grant. The DIRECTIVE is also used for “commissive” types of statements such as promises, vows, pledges, oaths, contracts, or guarantees, where the statement is a wish or command directed at oneself.</ins>

@tab DEC

**DECLARATIVE**

A “performative” statement which, by its utterance/publication, creates a change of state (at least psychologically) for the addressees (i.e., a declaration, announcement, edict, etc.)

<ins>The DECLARATIVE is used for utterances whose purpose is to themselves effect a change upon the real world, based upon convention, cultural rules, law, subjective authority, or personal authority or control of a situation. The commitment imposed upon the hearer is one of recognition or non-recognition. Such utterances include declarations, announcements, proclamations, and various “performative” expressions. Certain languages mark this function of a verb using a mood known as hortative. Examples would be: <em>I dub thee “Clown Master”!</em>, <em>The king will hear all grievances at noon each day</em>, <em>This court is now in session</em>, <em>We hereby declare this treaty null and void!</em></ins>

@tab IRG

**INTERROGATIVE**

A statement whose purpose is to inquire or seek information from the addressee (i.e., equivalent to an English WH-question) — see [Sec. 10.6](10#Sec10_6) for further explanation on the use of <abbr>IRG</abbr> Illocution

@tab VER

**VERIFICATIVE**

A statement whose purpose is to seek/obtain corroboration, confirmation, or verification (i.e., equivalent to a Yes/No question)

<ins>The commitment on the part of the listener in regard to the VERIFICATIVE is one of compliance or non-compliance in divulging the information sought, and the truth value of the utterance is neutral pending the reply.</ins>

@tab ADM

**ADMONITIVE**

A statement whose purpose is to provide advisory/admonitive information to the addressee (i.e., a warning)

<ins>The ADMONITIVE is used for admonitions and warnings, corresponding to English phrases such as ‘(I) caution you lest…,’ ‘(I) warn you against…,’ or ‘Be careful not to….’ The utterance is neither true nor false because it describes only a potential act or situation which may occur unless avoided. The commitment on the part of the hearer is to assess the degree of likelihood of the potentiality, followed by a choice whether to heed or ignore/defy the utterance.</ins>

@tab POT

**POTENTIATIVE**

A statement of wishing, hoping, or other unreal(ized) provenance

@tab HOR

**HORTATIVE**

A counterfactual statement indicating a desired but impossible state of affairs that cannot be realized (equivalent to English hortative constructions such as *If only...*, *Were that...*, *If only it were so that...*)

<ins>The HORTATIVE is used for statements that are untrue or unreal, but wished to be true or real.</ins>

@tab CNJ

**CONJECTURAL**

Equivalent to an English-language “if”-clause, indicating that the statement is offered as a conjectured hypothetical, ostensibly to be followed by a “then...” implicational clause. Translatable as “If (it were the case that)...”

:::

### 6.1.2 Validation {#Sec6_1_2}

**Validation** refers to the evidential basis for a statement in ASSERTIVE Illocution. Like various Native American and other natural languages, New Ithkuil requires a speaker to grammatically indicate the evidential source for an any assertion. Note that Validation applies only to formatives with ASSERTIVE Illocution; it does not apply to the other eight Illocutions, as they are not making a truth claim about the world. There are nine Validations: **OBSERVATIONAL**, **RECOLLECTIVE**, **PURPORTIVE**, **REPORTIVE**, **UNSPECIFIED**, **IMAGINARY**, **CONVENTIONAL**, **INTUITIVE**, and **INFERENTIAL**, explained below:

::: tabs

@tab OBS

**OBSERVATIONAL**

Present sensory knowledge or present sensory experience: “I perceive... / I know...”

@tab REC

**RECOLLECTIVE**

Past sensory knowledge or past sensory experience – “I remember... / I know (from memory)...”

@tab PUP

**PURPORTIVE**

Knowledge from a definitive/(quasi-)verifiable 3rd party source: “I’ve read... / (an expert) has said...”

@tab RPR

**REPORTIVE**

Knowledge from a 3rd party: “I heard (from someone)... / someone has said...”

@tab USP

**UNSPECIFIED**

[Validation deliberately unspecified]

@tab IMA

**IMAGINARY**

Unreal statement, not intended as true, based on whim, imagination, dream, altered mental state, etc.

@tab CVN

**CONVENTIONAL**

Cultural/conventional (i.e., collectively agreed-upon) knowledge: “They say... / It is said...”

@tab ITU

**INTUITIVE**

Intuition, hunch, subjective feeling, past experiences, etc. – “I feel... / I have a hunch... / something tells me...”

@tab INF

**INFERENTIAL**

Inference from evidence (or absence of alternatives), induction, extrapolation, etc. “I infer... / I reason...”

:::

### 6.1.3 Slot IX `Vk` Affix Values Denoting Illocution and Validation {#Sec6_1_3}

::: tabs

@tab <abbr>ASR</abbr> ASSERTIVE Illocution

1. <abbr>OBS</abbr> OBSERVATIONAL : <b>(á)</b>
2. <abbr>REC</abbr> RECOLLECTIVE : <b>â</b>
3. <abbr>PUP</abbr> PURPORTIVE : <b>é</b>
4. <abbr>RPR</abbr> REPORTIVE : <b>í</b>
5. <abbr>USP</abbr> UNSPECIFIED : <b>êi</b>
6. <abbr>IMA</abbr> IMAGINARY : <b>ô</b>
7. <abbr>CVN</abbr> CONVENTIONAL : <b>ó</b>
8. <abbr>ITU</abbr> INTUITIVE : <b>û</b>
9. <abbr>INF</abbr> INFERENTIAL : <b>ú</b>

@tab Other Illocutions

* <abbr>DIR</abbr> DIRECTIVE Illocution : <b>ái</b>
* <abbr>DEC</abbr> DECLARATIVE Illocution : <b>áu</b>
* <abbr>IRG</abbr> INTERROGATIVE Illocution : <b>éi</b>
* <abbr>VER</abbr> VERIFICATIVE Illocution : <b>éu</b>
* <abbr>ADM</abbr> ADMONITIVE Illocution : <b>óu</b>
* <abbr>POT</abbr> POTENTIATIVE Illocution : <b>ói</b>
* <abbr>HOR</abbr> HORTATIVE Illocution : <b>íu</b>
* <abbr>CNJ</abbr> CONJECTURAL Illocution : <b>úi</b>

:::

### 6.1.4 Examples of Illocution and Validation In Use {#Sec6_1_4}

<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Wäšwelciçxöehâ</dt>
  <dd>[default Ca]-CPT-“be.alive”-COS₁/3-XCL₁/4-SUR-<b>REC</b></dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>walhaci</dt>
  <dd>[default Ca]-“parent’s.sibling”-GID₁/1-AFF</dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>walhecue.</dt>
  <dd>[default Ca]-“parent’s.sibling”-GID₁/3-CMP</dd>
</dl>
<div class="glend"><q>My aunt lived longer than my uncle although neither of them lived to old age.</q></div>

<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Yiţxirňiexnalté</dt>
  <dd>PRX-/CPT-“evolve”-EPC₁/4-PZE₃/2-RTI₁/1-<b>PUP</b></dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>wialmya.</dt>
  <dd>[default Ca]-N-“flowering.plant”-THM</dd>
</dl>
<div class="glend"><q>Flowering plants had not yet developed / were yet to develop during the Cambrian geological period (but they have developed since).</q></div>

<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Yamţrí</dt>
  <dd>PRX-PRC-“rain”-[default Ca]-<b>RPR</b></dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>chwadiʼa.</dt>
  <dd>“outdoors”-PRX-LOC</dd>
</dl>
<div class="glend"><q>Iʼm told it’s raining outside</q></div>

<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Wimžiawêi</dt>
  <dd>[default Ca]-/CPT-“sexual.relations”-PMP-<b>USP</b></dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>ebštilu.</dt>
  <dd>Stem.2-“priest”-OBJ-[default Ca]-IND</dd>
</dl>
<div class="glend"><q>The priest finally lost his virginity.</q></div>

<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Wekškô</dt>
  <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.2/PRC-“monster”-<b>IMA</b></dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>wakçmiʼa.</dt>
  <dd>[default Ca]-PRC-“outdoor.balcony”-LOC</dd>
</dl>
<div class="glend"><q>There’s a monster on the balcony.</q></div>

<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Iuprulövḑuadnó</dt>
  <dd>Stem.3/CPT/NEG₁/4-“descend”-DYN-ASC₁/6-OGC₃/9-<b>CVN</b></dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>walxu</dt>
  <dd>[default Ca]-PRC-“Sol”-IND</dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>ëivḑilamkiʼa</dt>
  <dd>Cs-ROOT:ASC₁/4-FGN₂/1-LOC</dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>lei.</dt>
  <dd>1m-GEN</dd>
</dl>
<div class="glend"><q>They say down south the sun wonʼt set on my home town.</q></div>

<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Amskadwû</dt>
  <dd>“necessity”-PRX/N-<b>ITU</b></dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>kšivölaʼi</dt>
  <dd>“clown”-N-CTR₁/6-ACT</dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>wiorkwa.</dt>
  <dd>N-“filial.love”-THM</dd>
</dl>
<div class="glend"><q>I think even clowns need love.</q></div>

<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Yuçkú</dt>
  <dd>PRX-Stem.3/PRC-“suffer.from.illness”-FAC-<b>INF</b></dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>elari.</dt>
  <dd>Stem.2/PRC-“child”-G-AFF</dd>
</dl>
<div class="glend"><q>The kids must be ill.</q></div>

<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Weiluʼi,</dt>
  <dd>Stem.2/G-“child”-VOC</dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
    <dt>gulái</dt>
    <dd>“ambulate”-DYN-<b>DIR</b></dd>
  </dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>onţläliʼö</dt>
  <dd>“automobile”-CTE-ABL</dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>kšiʼve</dt>
  <dd>“clown”-N-COR</dd>
</dl>
<div class="glend"><q>Children, walk away from the clown car!</q></div>

<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Wimbruswiöháu!</dt>
  <dd>[default Ca]-/CPT-“compete.to.win”-ca:IND-SLF:BEN-<b>DEC</b></dd>
</dl>
<div class="glend"><q>Here’s the winner! / We have a winner!</q></div>

<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Arveléi</dt>
  <dd>“amount.of.elapsed.time”-CSV-<b>IRG</b></dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
    <dt>iträluʼö</dt>
    <dd>CPT-“process.of.approaching”-CTE-IRL</dd>
  </dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>kšiʼţe?</dt>
  <dd>“clown”-MDS-COR</dd>
</dl>
<div class="glend"><q>How long has it been since the clownsʼ arrival?</q></div>

<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Yuçkéu</dt>
  <dd>PRX-Stem.3/PRC-“suffer.from.illness”-FAC-<b>VER</b></dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>elari.</dt>
  <dd>Stem.2/PRC-“child”-G-AFF</dd>
</dl>
<div class="glend"><q>Are the kids ill?</q></div>

<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Wušštilkřóu!</dt>
  <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.3/PRC-“SARS-CoV-2.virus”-ADI₁/4-<b>ADM</b></dd>
</dl>
<div class="glend"><q>Beware of getting Covid-19!</q></div>

<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Wuišštilkřói</dt>
  <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.3/PRC/NEG₁/4-“SARS-CoV-2.virus”-ADI₁/4-<b>POT</b></dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>elare!</dt>
  <dd>Stem.2/PRC-“child”-G-ABS</dd>
</dl>
<div class="glend"><q>I hope the children donʼt get Covid-19!</q></div>

<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Wušštilkříu</dt>
  <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.3/PRC-“SARS-CoV-2.virus”-ADI₁/4-<b>HOR</b></dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>wopňuivẓe!</dt>
  <dd>PRX-Stem.0/PRC-“feel.malevolence/cruelty/sadism”-PSA₂/9-ABS</dd>
</dl>
<div class="glend"><q>If only that bastard would get Covid-19!</q></div>

<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Ätrulúi</dt>
  <dd>CPT-“translative.motion”-DYN-[default Ca]-<b>CNJ</b></dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>žu</dt>
  <dd>2m/DET-IND</dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>Hakšivé-Warswiʼo</dt>
  <dd>CONCATENATED:“clown”-OBJ-N-COR-PARENT:[default Ca]-PRC-“planet”-ALL</dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>ä</dt>
  <dd>PRS</dd>
</dl>
<dl class="gloss">
  <dt>eutruloewû.</dt>
  <dd>Stem.2/CPT/NEG₁/4-“approach”-DYN-[default Ca]-ITC-<b>ITU</b></dd>
</dl>
<div class="glend"><q>If you go to the Clown Planet, there’ll be no coming back.</q></div>

## 6.2 Case-Frames {#Sec6_2}

Virtually all languages allow for sentences to be hierarchically embedded within other sentences, a process termed **subordination**. In Western languages, the embedded sentence becomes either a subordinate clause or a relative clause, explicitly introduced by a conjunction such as ‘that,’ ‘which,’ ‘who,’ ‘where,’‘although,’‘if,’‘while,’‘whereas,’ or a preposition followed by a conjunction, such as ‘through which,’‘by whom,’etc. In English, such clauses can also occur as an infinitive or gerundial verb construction. Both relative and subordinate clauses are illustrated in the following sentences:

* <q>The dog <b>that ate my hat</b> belongs to them.</q>
* <q>I want <b></b>him to stop shouting.</q>
* <q>The committee voted <b>to fire the superintendent.</b></q>
* <q>We demand <b>(that) you give us equal pay.</b></q>
* <q><b>Although he’s a college graduate</b>, he acts like a child.</q>
* <q>This is the slot <b>through which the letter is passed.</b></q>
* <q><b>In case you’re unaware</b>, I’ll be leaving next month.</q>
* <q>The boy <b>walking toward us</b> is my nephew.</q>

The New Ithkuil equivalent to relative or subordinate clauses is known as a **Case-Frame**, or simply, **Frame**. Conceptually, the sentence to be embedded is simply treated as a noun participant to the main verb of a sentence and is therefore marked for Case like any other noun. For example, take the following two sentences:

* <q>She and I were working together.</q>
* <q>The two nations were at war.</q>

Suppose we want to use the second sentence to provide a temporal context for the first sentence. In English, we could do this by subordinating the second sentence to the first using the conjunction ‘while,’ as in <q>She and I were working together while the two nations were at war</q>. Alternately, we could create a relative clause by inserting a connecting prepositional phrase, as in <q>She and I were working together during the time (that) the two nations were at war.</q>

In New Ithkuil, temporal context for a sentence may be provided by a noun in any of the temporal Cases such as the CONCURSIVE (see Sec. 4.9.1). A word such as ‘summer’ or ‘famine’ would be placed in the CONCURSIVE Case to create a sentence corresponding to:

* <q>She and I were working together during the summer.</q>
* <q>She and I were working together at the time of the famine.</q>

Just as the single words ‘summer’ and ‘famine’ are placed in the CONCURSIVE Case, so an entire sentence such as <q>The two nations were at war</q> can be placed in the CONCURSIVE Case to provide the temporal context for the main sentence. In other words, New Ithkuil treats the entire subordinate sentence as a noun phrase to be declined into any required Case. That is the purpose of a **Frame**, to place sentences into noun cases. By doing so, New Ithkuil accomplishes the same task for which Western languages use relative and subordinate conjunctions.

### 6.2.1 Relation and the Placement of Frames {#Sec6_2_1}

To construct a Case-Frame, the second-order sentence (i.e., the sentence to be subordinated) is placed in the main sentence at the point where a noun declined for the required Case would appear. The actual Case of the second-order sentence is indicated in the verbal formative the same way as for nominal formatives, i.e., via the `Vc` affix in Slot IX. Additionally, the syllabic stress of the formative will change to show **FRAMED Relation**, explained in the next paragraph.

**Relation** is a binary category having two values **UNFRAMED** and **FRAMED** referring to whether the formative is or is not in a Case-Frame. The main verbal formative of a sentence is in UNFRAMED Relation (i.e., not in a Case-Frame), marked by ultimate (final) stress, which also indicates that the formative’s Slot IX affix is the `Vk` affix showing **Illocution**, **Expectation**, and **Validation**. Once a verbal formative is subordinated within a Case-Frame, it takes FRAMED relation, shown by antepenultimate (third-from-last) syllabic stress, in which case the formative’s Slot IX affix is the `Vc` affix showing the Case of the Case-Frame. Finally, if the formative has penultimate (second-from-last) syllabic stress then the formative is a noun in UNFRAMED Relation and the Slot IX affix is the `Vc` affix showing Case.

<div class="indent">

* Penultimate Stress = UNFRAMED Relation + `Vc`
* Ultimate Stress = UNFRAMED Relation + `Vk`
* Antepenultimate Stress = FRAMED Relation + `Vc`

</div>

If the formative does not have sufficient syllables to take antepenultimate stress, add syllables by filling Slots II and/or Slots VIII and IX with their default values. Note that a monosyllabic formative (other than a concatenated formative — see [Chapter 10](10#Sec10_1)) is considered morphologically to have ultimate stress (i.e., it is an UNFRAMED verbal formative).

If the Case-Frame is inserted at the beginning or into the middle of the main sentence, the final word of the Case-Frame will usually carry a special affix, -**n** (see the <abbr>TPF</abbr> affix in the Affixes document), which signifies the end of the frame if this will help to avoid confusion as to which words in the sentence belong inside the frame (i.e., with the secondary sentence), and which belong to the main sentence. A Case-Frame requires that its verb appear as the first element of the Case-Frame.

In general, the Perspective of the verb in the secondary sentence operates independently from that of the main verb, however, it is also common for the Perspective of the verb in the secondary sentence to be placed in the ABSTRACT, which has the effect of deferring all Perspective information about the verb to the main verb, similarly to the way English subordinate clauses using gerunds and infinitives defer all tense information to the main verb of the sentence.

### 6.2.2 Example of Case-Frames in Use {#Sec6_2_2}

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Étkwöʼe</dt>
      <dd>Stem.2/PRC/<b>FRAMED</b>-“attend.scheduled.event”-<b>PCR</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>wairţtuzwu</dt>
      <dd>[default Ca]-G-“study”-ca:IND₂-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>welhwëubzanëi</dt>
      <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.2/PRC-“play.musical.instrument”-FEA₂/5-<b>TPF₁/1</b>-STM</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>itrulalžói</dt>
      <dd>Stem.2/CPT-“approach”-OBG₁/1-POT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>kaʼi</dt>
      <dd>pa/BEN-ACT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>wurmieliʼo</dt>
      <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.3/PRC-“house”-1m/NEU-PRP-ALL</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>wuttíhia</dt>
      <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.3/PRC/<b>FRAMED</b>-“introduce”-RCP-<b>APL</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>kšiluržu.</dt>
      <dd>“clown”-OBJ-[default Ca]-HRC₁/9-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>After the students attend the concert, they must come to my house to meet the Chief Clown.</q></div>
</div>

### 6.3 Relative Clause Formation {#Sec6_3}

Generally, New Ithkuil uses the RELATIVE Case and the DESCRIPTIVE Case to form relative clauses. Usage is shown via the examples below. (NOTE: In the examples below, default morphological values such as <abbr>STA/BSC</abbr> Function/Specification, <abbr>PRC</abbr> version, <abbr>ASR/OBS</abbr> Illocution/Validation, or default `Ca` are not listed in the interlinear analyses.)

(1a)

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Weňayá</dt>
      <dd>“compose.in.writing”-RTR</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>kšilo</dt>
      <dd>“clown”-STA/OBJ-ERG</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>äpçólöwa</dt>
      <dd>FRAMED:CPT-“read”-DYN/CSV-PCS-THM</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>lu</dt>
      <dd>1m-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>eňtyarkena.</dt>
      <dd>“written.page”-MSC/COA-TPF/3-THM</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend">A clown wrote the book I just finished reading.<br>[More literally: A clown wrote what I just finished reading — a book.]</div>
</div>

The above sentence could also be structured using a RELATIVE Case-Frame, however it would require a Reduplicative specialized referential root (see Sec. 4.6.4) with a switch-reference affix:

(1b)

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Weňayá</dt>
      <dd>“compose.in.writing”-RTR</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>kšilo</dt>
      <dd>“clown”-STA/OBJ-ERG</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>eňtyarkena</dt>
      <dd>“written.page”-MSC/COA-TPF/3-THM</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>äpçólöʼyu</dt>
      <dd>FRAMED:CPT-“read”-DYN/CSV-PCS-RLT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>lu</dt>
      <dd>1m-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>thaxač.</dt>
      <dd>Rdp-SWR/1-THM</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend">A clown wrote the book I just finished reading.</div>
</div>

The following two sentences utilize a RELATIVE Case-Frame:

(2a)

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Ẓalá</dt>
      <dd>“see”</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>li</dt>
      <dd>1m/NEU-AFF</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>kšilenëi</dt>
      <dd>“clown”-STA/OBJ-TPF/3-STM</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>máliʼhu</dt>
      <dd>FRAMED:“talk”-RCP-FAC-RLT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>welu.</dt>
      <dd>“child”-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>I see a clown (who is) talking with a child.</q></div>
</div>

(2b)

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Erčädókh</dt>
      <dd>“state.of.being.corrupted”-STA/CTE-PRX-SBT/7</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>elavöte</dt>
      <dd>“child”-N-DCD/6-ABS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>žžjáduʼu</dt>
      <dd>FRAMED:“feel.fascination”-STA/BSC-PRX-RLT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>kšivëi.</dt>
      <dd>“clown”-STA/OBJ-N-STM</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>Children who like clowns have obviously been corrupted.</q></div>
</div>

The following sentence utilizes a noun in the DESCRIPTIVE Case, which operates like RELATIVE Case for adjectival clauses:

(3)

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Erčuláfs</dt>
      <dd>“corrupt”-DYN/BSC-ATI/1</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>elaţwe</dt>
      <dd>“child”-MDS/N-ABS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>ainšaiʼdä</dt>
      <dd>NEG/4-FNC-“be.well-behaved”-PRX-DSP</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>kšivöto</dt>
      <dd>“clown”-STA/OBJ-N-DCD/6-ERG</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>hlarrnëi-yúřkuʼu.</dt>
      <dd>CONCATENATED:“ocelot”-STM-FRAMED:PARENT:Stem.3:“own”-PRX-RLT</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>Ocelot-owning clowns tend to corrupt children who are naughty.</q></div>
</div>

The following sentence utilizes a carrier adjunct marked for RELATIVE Case:

(4)

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Yuřká</dt>
      <dd>“own”-PRX</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>warrnenëi</dt>
      <dd>“ocelot”-TPF/3-STM</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>kšila</dt>
      <dd>“clown”-STA/OBJ-THM</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>hluʼu</dt>
      <dd>CARRIER-RLT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Bubu.</dt>
      <dd>“Bubu”</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>The clown owns an ocelot named Boo-boo.</q></div>
</div>

Determining the semantic role of the “head” of a relative clause depends on the structure of the sentence. In sentences such as 5a below (as well as Sentence 1a above) where the head of the clause is contained within the subordinated Case-Frame, the semantic role of the head of the relative clause is shown by the Case of the Case-Frame (i.e., the Case shown on the framed verb beginning the relative clause).

(5a)

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Umňälöřdá</dt>
      <dd>“scream”-STA/CTE-SQC/6</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>ẓúlikti</dt>
      <dd>FRAMED:“see”-DYN-TPP/4-<b>AFF</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>lo</dt>
      <dd>1m-ERG</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>kšilëi</dt>
      <dd>“clown”-STM</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>welene.</dt>
      <dd>“child”-TPF/3-ABS</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend">“The child whom I made look at a clown is now screaming.”<br>[more literally: “Now screaming is whom I made look at a clown — the child.”]</div>
</div>

However, in sentence 5b below, the head of the relative clause is not contained within the Case-Frame, therefore its semantic role within the Case-Frame remains implied only, since the Case-Frame must be marked for RELATIVE Case.

(5b)

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Umňälá</dt>
      <dd>“scream”-STA/CTE</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>lo</dt>
      <dd>1m-ERG</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>welene</dt>
      <dd>“child”-TPF/3-ABS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>máliʼhu</dt>
      <dd>FRAMED:“talk”-RCP-FAC-RLT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>kšivu.</dt>
      <dd>“clown”-N-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>I made the child who talks with clowns scream.</q></div>
</div>

If necessary for disambiguation, the semantic role of the head in such a sentence can be marked using a Reduplicative Referential as shown in Sentence 5c below (as well as Sentence 1b above).

(5c)

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Umňälá</dt>
      <dd>“scream”-STA/CTE</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>lo</dt>
      <dd>1m-ERG</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>welene</dt>
      <dd>“child”-TPF/3-ABS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>máliʼhu</dt>
      <dd>FRAMED:“talk”-RCP-FAC-RLT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>thu</dt>
      <dd>Rdp-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>kšivu.</dt>
      <dd>“clown”-N-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>I made the child who talks with clowns scream.</q></div>
</div>

Note that in cases such as Sentences 1b and 5c above where the Reduplicative Referential appears without an accompanying <abbr>SWR</abbr> switch-reference affix while inside a Case-Frame functioning as a relative clause, the Reduplicative adjunct refers to the head of the relative clause.

Unrestricted relative clauses are shown either by attaching a coordinative clause or by inserting the clause using PARENTHETICAL register (see [Sec. 8.3](08#Sec8_3)).