---
title: 07 Affixes
---
## 7.0 Affixes {#Sec7}

Up to this point, the morpho-phonological Slots of formative have each contained a mandatory affix (although some of these affixes can be elided in certain circumstances). However, Slots V and VII are different, in that they contain optional affixes which can be agglutinated (i.e., multiple affixes sequentially strung together).

<div class="t">Standard Slot Structure of a Formative</div>

<!-- @include: struct.md{1249-1403} -->

The phonological format of Slot V and Slot VII affixes comprises a vocalic increment `Vx` plus a consonantal increment `Cs` to give a format of `VxCs`. The consonantal `Cs` component never changes, however the `Vx` vocalic component consists of an array of thirty different vowel-forms, by which the affix creates a complex matrix of different types and degrees, explained and illustrated in the sub-sections below.

<div class="table-3">
    <table>
        <caption>The Standard Vowel-Form Sequence</caption>
        <thead>
            <tr>
                <th>Degree</th>
                <th>Type-1</th>
                <th>Type-2</th>
                <th>Type-3</th>
            </tr>
        </thead>
        <tbody>
            <tr>
                <th>1</th>
                <td>a</td>
                <td>ai</td>
                <td>ia / uä</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <th>2</th>
                <td>ä</td>
                <td>au</td>
                <td>ie / uë</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <th>3</th>
                <td>e</td>
                <td>ei</td>
                <td>io / üä</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <th>4</th>
                <td>i</td>
                <td>eu</td>
                <td>iö / üë</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <th>5</th>
                <td>ëi</td>
                <td>ëu</td>
                <td>eë</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <th>6</th>
                <td>ö</td>
                <td>ou</td>
                <td>uö / öë</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <th>7</th>
                <td>o</td>
                <td>oi</td>
                <td>uo / öä</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <th>8</th>
                <td>ü</td>
                <td>iu</td>
                <td>ue / ië</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <th>9</th>
                <td>u</td>
                <td>ui</td>
                <td>ua / iä</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <th>0</th>
                <td>ae</td>
                <td>ea</td>
                <td>üo</td>
            </tr>
        </tbody>
    </table>
</div>

No `Cs` form can contain a glottal-stop or begin with **h**-, nor can the following specific consonant-forms occur as `Cs`: -**w**-, -**y**-, -**ç**-, -**ļ**-, -**ļw**-, or -**ļy**-. Additionally, no geminated consonant can be a `Cs` form.

### 7.0.1 Degree 0 {#Sec7_0_1}

The last row of values in the table above is termed “Degree Zero”, indicating an unspecified degree and refers to the affix’s general semantic concept as a whole. Note that even though a Degree Zero form technically exists for all affixes, not all affixes will utilize it if the semantics of the particular affix do not make for a coherent interpretation of a Degree Zero value.

### 7.0.2 `Ca` stacking {#Sec7_0_2}

The specialized `Vx` value -**üö**, is used to indicate that the subsequent `Cs` consonant-form is to be interpreted as a `Ca` complex having scope over (i.e., stacked upon) the Slot VI `Ca` complex of the stem (see [Sec. 3.6](03#Sec3_6) for an explanation of the `Ca` complex).

::: warning Revisor’s Comment

Its scope depends on which Slot the `Ca` stacking affix is ​​in: For in Slot V and VII, the former is governed by Slot VI `Ca`, and the latter governs Slot VI `Ca`.

:::

## 7.1 `VxCs` Affix Degree and Gradient-Type {#Sec7_1}

All `VxCs` affixes have nine different degrees (plus a “degree-less” “zero” form). The nine degrees are used to create a range or gradient-like spectrum of meanings of seven different types. For the purposes of grammatical notation, the degree of an affix is shown as a number 0 through 9 with a preceding slash, immediately following the **V**-marker (with its affix-type shown as a subscript) and the specific `Cs` consonantal form, `VxCs/#`, e.g., `-V₂g/7`. The gradient types are explained below.

::: tabs

@tab 0 (Zero)

No gradient pattern. The nine degrees of the affix do not manifest any particular hierarchical semantic gradient. Affixes of Gradient Type 0 are either a single sibilant (whether a fricative or affricate), a sibilant + stop, a sibilant + fricative (other than -**ç**-, -**x**-, or -**h**-), or a bi-consonantal form ending in a sibilant, e.g., -**s**, -**č**, -**sk**, -**gz**, -**jd**. An example of a Gradient Type Zero affix is -**sp** shown below.

<div class="indent">

<span class="t">-sp | <abbr>NEW*</abbr> | <tooltip label="Newness/Revision">Newness/Revision</tooltip></span>

1. new = original + new, i.e., never before seen
2. new = never before seen within current context, e.g., a new student
3. new = role, i.e., never functioning/existing in this capacity/manner before
4. new/other = replacement + new
5. new/other = additional instance + new
6. new/other = revision + additional
7. new/other = revision + replacement
8. new/other/different = different, not seen/used before within current context; status as addition or replacement is unknown or inapplicable
9. new/other/different = different + new; status as addition or replacement is unknown or inapplicable

</div>

@tab A1

A bivalent zero-to-one gradient. Degree 1 signifies one extreme of a gradient spectrum/range of meaning (whether minimal or maximal) while Degree 9 signifies the other extreme (whether minimal or maximal). Degrees 2 through 8 cumulatively add (or subtract) an amount of the concept associated with the affix. Gradient Type A1 affixes consist of a a bi- or tri-consonantal form beginning with -**r** or -**ř**, e.g., -**rt**, -**řn**, -**rks**. An example of a Gradient Type A1 affix is -**rļ** shown below.

<div class="indent">

<span class="t">-rļ | <abbr>FAM</abbr> | <tooltip label="Degree Of Familiarity">Degree Of Familiarity</tooltip></span>

1. unknowable / alien; unable to even try X-ing
2. totally unfamiliar, utterly strange; totally unaccustomed to X-ing
3. unfamiliar, strange; unaccustomed to X-ing
4. somewhat unfamiliar; somewhat unaccustomed to X-ing
5. just becoming familiar, just getting to know; just getting used to X-ing
6. somewhat familiar; somewhat accustomed to X-ing
7. familiar/known; accustomed to X-ing
8. well-known / utterly familiar with / ingrained; inherently accustomed or used to X-ing
9. intimate with; intimately involved with / intimately accustomed to

</div>

@tab A2

A bivalent “zero-to-one” spectrum-like gradient like Type A1 where Degrees 1 and 9 convey sufficiency connotations of “too little X” and “too much X”. Gradient Type D affixes consist of or end in -**h** (except -**rh** and -**řh**, which are Type A1). An example of a Gradient Type A2 affix is -**mh** shown below.

<div class="indent">

<span class="t">-mh | <abbr>FLS</abbr> | <tooltip label="Degree of Fluctuation/Stability">Degree of Fluctuation/Stability</tooltip></span>

1. too unstable / too random
2. unstable / highly variable/random fluctuation or instability
3. moderately variable/random fluctuation or instability
4. increasing fluctuation or destabilization in pattern
5. tending toward fluctuations and periods of instability
6. decreasing fluctuation or instability in pattern = increasing stability
7. moderately stable and lacking in fluctuations
8. complete lack of fluctuation or instability; highly stable, steadfast
9. too stable

</div>

@tab B

A “three-by-three” gradient pattern. Degrees 1 through 3 signify a spectrum or range involving one sub-parameter, Degrees 4 through 6 signify the same spectrum/range under a different sub-parameter, and Degrees 7 through 9 signify the same spectrum/range under a third sub-parameter. Gradient Type B affixes consist of at least two consonants and always begin or end with -**ç**-. An example of a Gradient Type B affix is -**çţ** shown below.

<div class="indent">

<span class="t">-çţ | <abbr>RPN</abbr> | <tooltip label="Pattern of Spatio-Temporal Repetition or Distribution of Set Members">Pattern of Spatio-Temporal Repetition or Distribution of Set Members</tooltip></span>

1. slow-paced repetition at regular intervals
2. slow-paced repetition at irregular intervals
3. slow-paced repetition at mixed intervals
4. mid-paced repetition at irregular intervals
5. mid-paced repetition at regular intervals
6. mid-paced repetition at mixed intervals
7. fast-paced repetition at mixed intervals
8. fast-paced repetition at irregular intervals
9. fast-paced repetition at regular intervals

</div>

@tab C

A “one-by-two” or “oscillating” gradient. Degree 1 represents one extreme of a spectrum/range which increases/decreases to the other extreme of the spectrum/range usually represented by Degree 4, while Degrees 6 through 9 cycle back through the same values but with a different sub-parameter operating orthogonally to Degrees 1 through 4. Degree 5 usually represents a neutral or meta-level value associated with the semantic concept of the affix. Gradient Type C affixes consist of or end in -**ř**. An example of a Gradient Type C affix is -**nř** shown below.

<div class="indent">

<span class="t">-nř | <abbr>AGN</abbr> | <tooltip label="Degree of Agency, Intent or Effectiveness">Degree of Agency, Intent or Effectiveness</tooltip></span>

1. with the anticipated max. resulting effect possible
2. with the anticipated resulting effect to a high degree
3. with the anticipated resulting effect to a moderate degree
4. with the anticipated resulting effect but only to a marginal, superficial or barely noticeable degree
5. with no noticeable effect or resulting change
6. with only marginal, superficial, or barely noticeable effect or resulting change unanticipated
7. with moderate effect or resulting change — unanticipated
8. with the resulting effect to a high degree — unanticipated
9. with the max. resulting effect possible — unanticipated

</div>

@tab D1

A trivalent “-1 to zero to +1” gradient. Degrees 1 and 9 represent opposite (or complementary) extremes of a spectrum/range while Degree 5 (sometimes Degree 4 or 6) represents a “mid-point” signifying a standard, normal, commonplace, neutral, zero, or baseline value. This is the most common type of affix. Any consonant-form that does not phonologically conform to the other types is a Gradient Type D1 affix. An example of a Gradient Type Zero affix is -**lţ** shown below.

<div class="indent">

<span class="t">-lţ | <abbr>SQT</abbr> | <tooltip label="Sequence Relative to Present Context">Sequence Relative to Present Context</tooltip></span>

1. the former; primarily
2. two before preceding
3. one before preceding
4. immediately beforehand / the preceding / first (of two)
5. current/at hand; now/currently / at the moment [in sequence of events]
6. next / following; then / next
7. one after next
8. second one after next
9. the latter; secondarily

</div>

@tab D2

A trivalent “-1 to zero to +1” gradient like Type D1 where Degrees 1 and 9 convey sufficiency connotations of “too little X” and “too much X”, where the operating sufficiency parameter is excessiveness (or the lack thereof). Gradient Type D2 affixes either end in (or consist of) -**x**, or consist of two or more consonants ending in -**m**. An example of a Gradient Type D2 affix is -**km** shown below.

<div class="indent">

<span class="t">-km | <abbr>TME</abbr> | <tooltip label="Degree Of Timeliness (renamed from LAT)">Degree Of Timeliness</tooltip></span>

1. too early / too soon
2. (quite) early
3. a little early / a bit soon
4. almost late / not a moment too soon / none too soon
5. just in time / sharp / on the dot
6. slightly late but not enough to make a difference
7. a little late
8. late / just missed it
9. too late / you missed it

</div>

:::

## 7.2 `VxCs` Affix Type {#Sec7_2}

Each `VxCs` affix comes in three types, numbered 1, 2, and 3, indicated by variances in the initial vocalic component of the affix. For the purposes of grammatical notation, the degree of an affix is shown as a subscript to the vocalic V-marker of an affix (i.e., it replaces the subscript-*x* in the notation `VxCs` e.g., `-V₂g/7`).

Use of the Type-1 version of an affix caries a mere circumstantial meaning applicable to the context at hand in a subjectively incidental, happenstance, temporary, or informal manner, whereas the Type-2 version of an affix implies a derivational meaning which can entail lexical differences when translating into English.

For example, the Type-1 affix -**urx**, i.e., `-V₁rx/9`, and its Type-2 counterpart -**uirx**, i.e., `-V₂rx/9`, which both mean ‘exactly similar to…/indistinguishable from/identical…,’ the difference in usage being that the Type-1 affix conveys merely a circumstantial or incidental similarity, while the Type-2 affix implies that the similarity is an integral aspect of the word. In English, such a distinction would most likely be conveyed by using a different word. For example, note the difference when we add these two affixes to the Ithkuil word **wal** ‘person’: **walurx** means ‘identical-looking person,’ whereas **waluirx** means ‘twin.’ In this way, we can say that the affix `-Vrx` with Type-1 vocalic infixes conveys a circumstantial application of its meaning to a stem, while with Type-2 vocalic infixes it conveys a derivational application of its meaning (i.e., wholly new concepts or words are derived from the stem).

As for Type-3 affixes, these are used in circumstances where the meaning of the affix is meant to be applied not to the formative itself, but rather to the immediately adjacent affix. This is somewhat analogous to the way that adverbs can be used to modify descriptive adjectives in English. For example, in the phrase *‘suddenly blue sky’*, it is the blueness that is sudden, not the sky. In Ithkuil, Type-3 affixes modify another affix (usually the one following, unless there are only two affixes on the stem, in which case the affix order is irrelevant); this is done by using Type-3 vocalic infixes. For example, the affix `-Vcč/7`, which means ‘made-up, imaginary,’ can be used both circumstantially (using the Type-1 infix) and derivationally (using the Type-2 infix) to modify a stem, or can be used to modify only the adjacent affix (using the Type-3 infix). Such affixes must immediately precede the affix they are modifying, unless they are in word-final position, in which case they modify the immediately preceding affix. This is illustrated below:

* Type-1 affix: walocča: <q>a made-up/imaginary person</q>
* Type-2 affix: waloicča: <q>a fictional person</q> (i.e., a character from a work of fiction)
* Type-3 affix: waluocčox: <q>a person who is imagined to be large</q> (where affix `-V₁x/7` = ‘large’)

The following example illustrates the use of a Type-2 affix modified by a Type-3 affix to create the concept of *‘breakfast’*, analyzable literally as “formal/conventionalized instance of morning-time eating/drinking of foodstuff”:

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Alksodëubzuöřcá</dt>
        <dd>“eat/drink.foodstuff”-DYN-CSV-PRX-FEA₂/5-AMD₃/6-OBS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>kšilu.</dt>
        <dd>“clown”-OBJ-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>The clown is eating breakfast.</q></div>
</div>

## 7.3 Glottal Stop Requirements {#Sec7_3}

There are two situations in which a glottal stop must be inserted into a formative in order to avoid confusion caused by the `VxCs` affixes in Slot V. These are described below.

### 7.3.1 Using Slot II to Foreshadow the Presence of Multiple Affixes in Slot V {#Sec7_3_1}

When Slot V of a formative contains more than one `CsVx` or `VxCs` affix, it becomes a problem whether to interpret the consonant forms as `Cs` forms or a `Ca` form until the eventual “arrival” of the end-of-Slot-V marker. Therefore, it is necessary to signal early on whether Slot V of a formative will contain more than one `CsVx` or `VxCs` affix. To do so, insert a glottal-stop into the `Vv` form of Slot II per the rules in Sec. 2.2.

### 7.3.2 Showing the End of Slot V in the Absence of a Slot VI `Ca` form {#Sec7_3_2}

For formatives containing any Slot V `VxCs` affix(es) where the Slot VI `Ca` form has been elided (see [Sec. 3.10](03#Sec3_10) on “short-cut” formatives), the end of Slot V is instead shown by inserting a glottal-stop into the `Vx` form of the final Slot V `VxCs` affix. This glottal-stop is inserted per the rules in Sec. 2.2. (<b>NOTE</b>: if such a Slot V glottal-stop is present and Slot I shows the word has a Slot IV/VI Shortcut, then the VC shortening rule from the Special Note in [Sec. 4.6](04#Sec4_6) cannot be used.)

## 7.4 Slot V Affixes versus Slot VII Affixes {#Sec7_4}

There is a difference between Slots V versus Slot VII affixes in terms of the phonological structure of the affix, as well as a difference in the semantic scope of the affix over the rest of the formative. This is explained as follows:

* <b>Slot V affixes</b>: If a `Ca` complex is present in Slot VI of the formative, any Slot V affixes are shown in reversed form: `CsVx`; however, if the Slot IV `Vr` and Slot VI `Ca` complex have been elided as indicated by Slot I (see [Sec. 3.10](03#Sec3_10) on “short-cut” formatives), then any Slot V affixes are shown in the standard form `VxCs`. As detailed earlier in [Sec. 3.6.1](03#Sec3_6_1), the presence of a Slot V affix requires any Slot VI `Ca` complex to be geminated.

<b>ALSO</b>: The semantic scope of any Slot V affixes applies only to the formative Stem, not to its Slot VI `Ca` affix-complex (i.e., the various meanings of the `Ca` affix-complex are applied to the formative stem AFTER the stem has first been modified by its Slot V affixes).

* <b>Slot VII</b> affixes are shown **in standard form** `VxCs` form, and apply to both the stem AND its `Ca` affix-complex (i.e., the meanings of the `Ca` affix-complex are applied to the formative stem first, then the resulting stem + `Ca` complex is then modified by any Slot VII affixes). Note that in the absence of any Slot V affix(es), the presence of any Slot VII affix(es) does not trigger the gemination of any Slot VI `Ca` complex.

The following example illustrates the difference between placing the `VxCs` affix `-V₁x/7` affix -**ox** (meaning ‘large in size’) in Slot V versus Slot VII:

* Slot V: rraxoţţ “a group of large but (otherwise) dissimilar cats”
* Slot VII：rraţox “a large group of dissimilar cats”

## 7.5 List of `VxCs` Affixes {#Sec7_5}

While Sec. 9.1 above offered a small sample of the different kinds of `VxCs` affixes, there are in fact several hundred different `VxCs` affixes. They are listed in a separate Affixes document.

::: tip

Please consult [the computerized database](14) as your primary reference, as it offers rectifications and supplementary information for the errors found in the original document.

:::

<PDF url="../assets/newithkuil_affixes.pdf" />

## 7.6 Case-Accessor, Inverse Case-Accessor, and Case-Stacking Affixes {#Sec7_6}

The concept of Case-Accessor, Inverse Case-Accessor, and Case-Stacking affixes was introduced in [Sec. 4.11](04#Sec4_11). Because they superficially share the same phonological structure as `VxCs` affixes, and occupy Slots V and VII the same as `VxCs` affixes, we have waited until now to present the full list of such affixes and their phonological structure.

<!-- @include: cases.md -->

### 7.6.1 The Phonological Structure of Case-Accessor, Inverse Case-Accessor, and Case-Stacking Affixes {#Sec7_6_1}

The phonological structure of these affixes is as follows: The `Vx` portion of the affix is the standard four vowel-form series of regular `VxCs` affixes. There are two separate `Cs` increments for each of the seven types of affix (Types-1, -2, and -3 Case-Accessor, Types-1, -2, and -3 Inverse Case-Accessor, and Case-Stacking Affix), the first `Cs` increment being used for Cases 1 through 36, while the second `Cs` increment is used for Cases 37 through 68.

`Vx` for the first 36 Cases is the first four standard-vowel form series (i.e., the same as their corresponding `Vc` case-affixes). Cases 37-68 utilize the same four vowel-form series (i.e., no glottal-stop is added to the `Vx` increment), the distinction from the first 36 Cases being indicated by their different `Cs` increment. This structure allows Case-Accessor and Case-Stacking affixes to appear in Slot V or Slot VII or in affixual adjuncts. See Sec. 5.7 as to how using the Case-Stacking affix on UNFRAMED verbal formatives can function as a substitute for Case-Frames.

<!-- @include: caf.md -->

\* For Cases 37 through 68: since these four case-groups each contain only eight Cases rather than nine and Vowel-Form No. 8 (the <b>ü</b>-tier) for each group is not used, similarly the eighth tier of vowel-forms are not used for these Case-Accessor or Case-Stacking affixes.

### 7.6.2 Examples of Type-1 and Type-2 Case-Assessor Affixes in Use {#Sec7_6_2}

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Pţödá</dt>
        <dd>“seek”-OBJ/DYN-PRX-OBS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>lu</dt>
        <dd>1M/NEU-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>psoloswëi.</dt>
        <dd>“cause.to.happen”-CSV/DYN-[default Ca]-<b>ca:ERG₁</b>-STM</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>What Iʼm seeking is the party who has done this.</q></div>
</div>

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Pţödá</dt>
        <dd>“seek”-OBJ/DYN-PRX-OBS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>lu</dt>
        <dd>1M/NEU-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>psolozwëi.</dt>
        <dd>“cause.to.happen”-CSV/DYN-[default Ca]-<b>ca:ERG₂</b>-STM</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>What Iʼm seeking is the perpetrator.</q></div>
</div>

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Äţtulalzói</dt>
        <dd>CPT-“know”-DYN-[default Ca]-DSD₁/1-POT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>laʼi</dt>
        <dd>1M/NEU-ACT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>welošwa</dt>
        <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.2/PRC-“child”-<b>ia:ERG₁</b>-THM</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>kšile.</dt>
        <dd>“clown”-OBJ-[default Ca]-ABS</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>I want to know what the child did to the clown.</q></div>
</div>

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Malalzói</dt>
        <dd>“talk”-[default Ca]-DSD₁/1-POT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>laʼi</dt>
        <dd>1M/NEU-ACT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>erdwilařstëuswü.</dt>
        <dd>Stem.2/CPT-“building”-OBJ-[default Ca]-LCM₁/1-<b>ca:PDC₁</b>-DAT</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>I want to talk to the designer of the building</q></div>
</div>

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Malalzói</dt>
        <dd>“talk”-[default Ca]-DSD₁/1-POT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>laʼi</dt>
        <dd>1M/NEU-ACT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>erdwilařstëuzwü.</dt>
        <dd>Stem.2/CPT-“building”-OBJ-[default Ca]-LCM₁/1-<b>ca:PDC₂</b>-DAT</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>I want to talk to the architect of the building.</q></div>
</div>

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Malalzói</dt>
        <dd>“talk”-[default Ca]-DSD₁/1-POT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>laʼi</dt>
        <dd>1M/NEU-ACT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>erdwili’sya.</dt>
        <dd>Stem.2/CPT-“building”-OBJ-[default Ca]-<b>ca:CPS₁</b>-PRN</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>I want to talk about what the building is made out of.</q></div>
</div>

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Malalzói</dt>
        <dd>“talk”-[default Ca]-DSD₁/1-POT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>laʼi</dt>
        <dd>1M/NEU-ACT</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>erdwiliʼzya.</dt>
        <dd>Stem.2/CPT-“building”-OBJ-[default Ca]-<b>ca:CPS₂</b>-PRN</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>I want to talk about the building’s construction materials.</q></div>
</div>

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Kšilá</dt>
        <dd>“clown”-OBJ-[default Ca]-OBS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>welëisya.</dt>
        <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.2/PRC-“child”-<b>ia:COM₁</b>-THM</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>The one whom the child is with is a clown.</q></div>
</div>

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Kšilá</dt>
        <dd>“clown”-OBJ-[default Ca]-OBS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>welëizya.</dt>
        <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.2/PRC-“child”-<b>ia:COM₂</b>-THM</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>The child’s chaperone is a clown.</q></div>
</div>

### 7.6.3 Type-3 Case-Assessor & Inverse Case-Assessor Affixes {#Sec7_6_3}

Use these to modify an adjacent `VxCs`; the Type-3 Accessor modifies the adjacent affix so that it refers to an appropriate participant to the formative where the nature of participation is indicated by the particular Case of the Accessor affix. The following are examples comparing a Type-3 Case-Accessor with its inverse counterpart:

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>wupsovļäčwa</dt>
        <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.3/PRC-“event”-PLE/7-<b>ca:INS₃</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>that by which a pleasant event occurs</q></div>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>wupsovļäjwa</dt>
        <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.3/PRC-“event”-PLE/7-<b>ia:INS₃</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>what a pleasant event is used for</q></div>
</div>

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>weproptočwa</dt>
        <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.2/PRC-“upward.motion”-DNG₁/7-<b>ca:ERG₃</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>the one who dangerously pushes (it) upward</q></div>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>weproptojwa</dt>
        <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.2/PRC-“upward.motion”-DNG₁/7-<b>ia:ERG₃</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>that which one dangerously pushes upward</q></div>
</div>

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>wufjopčiečwa</dt>
        <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.3/PRC-“interfere”-AUT₁/7-<b>ca:PUR₃</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>the purpose for using one’s authority to interfere</q></div>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>wufjopčiejwa</dt>
        <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.3/PRC-“interfere”-AUT₁/7-<b>ia:PUR₃</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>what using one’s authority to interfere is for</q></div>
</div>

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>weläxţičya</dt>
        <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.2/PRC-“child”-CNC₂/2-<b>ca:TRM₃</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>the selfish child’s goal</q>/<q>what the selfish child is after</q></div>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>weläxţijya</dt>
        <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.2/PRC-“child”-CNC₂/2-<b>ia:TRM₃</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q><del>the goal being</del> <ins>that whose goal is</ins> a selfish child</q>/<q><ins>that what is</ins> in pursuit/hope of a selfish child</q></div>
</div>

::: danger NOTE

Whenever one uses a Type-3 affix, whether a standard `VxCs` affix or a Type-3 Case-Accessor or Type-3 inverse Case-Accessor affix, it should be remembered that the Type-3 affix qualifies the immediately preceding affix only (or following affix if there are only two affixes in that particular Slot), the Type-3 affix **does not qualify the formative as a whole**. If the use of the Type-3 affix results in semantic ambiguity or incoherence, do not use a Type-3 affix.

:::

### 7.6.4 Examples of Case-Stacking Affixes {#Sec7_6_4}

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Hmažfie-egulirkwá</dt>
        <dd>PRX/CONCATENATED:PRC-“healthy.state”-PUR-PARENT:Stem.2-“ambulate”-DYN-CYC₁/4-OBS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>ru</dt>
        <dd>1M/BEN-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>yamţröalwaʼo.</dt>
        <dd>PRX-PRC-“rain”-<b>CVS-CNR</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>I jog every day except during the rain.</q></div>
</div>

Case-stacking allows for an alternative to Case-Frames. For example, examine the following sentence which uses a RELATIVE Case-Frame:

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Ẓulá</dt>
        <dd>“see”-DYN-[default Ca]-OBS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>mu</dt>
        <dd>ma/NEU-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>eňtyarka</dt>
        <dd>Stem.2-PRC-“written.page”-MSC/COA-THM</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>bzmareʼna</dt>
        <dd>“rat”-G-TPF₁/3-PRN</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>äšgúʼlayu</dt>
        <dd>CPT-“capture”-DYN/<b>FRAMED</b>-[default Ca]-RTR-<b>RLT</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>ro.</dt>
        <dd>1m/BEN-ERG</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>S/he looks at the book about the rats I captured.</q></div>
</div>

Now compare the above sentence to the following which uses a RELATIVE Case-Stacking affix in lieu of a Case-Frame:

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Ẓulá</dt>
        <dd>“see”-DYN-[default Ca]-OBS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>mu</dt>
        <dd>ma/NEU-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>eňtyarka</dt>
        <dd>Stem.2-PRC-“written.page”-MSC/COA-THM</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>bzmarulyeʼna</dt>
        <dd>“rat”-G-<b>RLT</b>-TPF₁/3-PRN</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>äšgulayâ</dt>
        <dd>CPT-“capture”-DYN​-RTR​-REC</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>ro.</dt>
        <dd>1m/BEN-ERG</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>S/he looks at the book about the rats I captured.</q></div>
</div>

To understand more clearly how the ordering of the formatives, the placement of the Case-Stacking affix, and the use of the <abbr>TPF</abbr> affix serves to give the above sentence its specific meaning, compare it to the following sentence with its subtly, different meaning:

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Ẓulá</dt>
        <dd>“see”-DYN-[default Ca]-OBS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>mu</dt>
        <dd>ma/NEU-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>eňtyarka</dt>
        <dd>Stem.2-PRC-“written.page”-MSC/COA-THM</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>äšgúʼlaya</dt>
        <dd>CPT-“capture”-DYN/FRAMED-[default Ca]-RTR-PRN</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>ro</dt>
        <dd>1m/BEN-ERG</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>bzmare.</dt>
        <dd>PRC-“rat”-G-ABS</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>S/he looks at the book about me having captured the rats.</q></div>
</div>

## 7.7 Using Slot II as a “Short-Cut” for Three Common Affixes {#Sec7_7}

Formatives whose Slot I value is either \[zero\], **h**-, or **hw**- (i.e., the formative does not contain a Slot IV/VI a+ `Ca` shortcut as per [Sec. 3.10](03#Sec3_10)), have the option of using their Slot II vowel-form to show one of three common `VxCs` affixes: <abbr>NEG₁/4</abbr>, <abbr>DCD₁/4</abbr> or <abbr>DCD₁/5</abbr>. Note that if one of these three optional Affix Shortcuts is used, this affix has scope over the stem, its `Ca` complex, and any other `VxCs` affixes within the formative (i.e., it operates as if it were the last affix in Slot VII). The Slot II vowel-form short-cuts for these three affixes are shown in the table below.

Slot II `Vv` Values if Slot I is **[zero]**, **h**-, or **hw**- (i.e., the formative does not contain a Slot IV/VI a + `Ca` shortcut)

<div class="table-3">
    <table>
        <thead>
        <tr>
            <th rowspan="2">Stem</th>
            <th rowspan="2">Version</th>
            <th rowspan="2"><code>Vv</code></th>
            <th colspan="3"><code>Vv</code> + Optional Affix Shortcuts</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th><abbr>NEG/4</abbr></th>
            <th><abbr>DCD/4</abbr></th>
            <th><abbr>DCD/5</abbr></th>
        </tr>
        </thead>
        <tbody>
        <tr>
            <th rowspan="2">Stem 1</th>
            <th><abbr>PRC</abbr></th>
            <td>(a)</td>
            <td>ai</td>
            <td>ia / uä</td>
            <td>ao</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th><abbr>CPT</abbr></th>
            <td>ä</td>
            <td>au</td>
            <td>ie / uë</td>
            <td>aö</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th rowspan="2">Stem 2</th>
            <th><abbr>PRC</abbr></th>
            <td>e</td>
            <td>ei</td>
            <td>io / üä</td>
            <td>eo</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th><abbr>CPT</abbr></th>
            <td>i</td>
            <td>eu</td>
            <td>iö / üë</td>
            <td>eö</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th rowspan="2">Stem 3</th>
            <th><abbr>PRC</abbr></th>
            <td>u</td>
            <td>ui</td>
            <td>ua / iä</td>
            <td>oa</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th><abbr>CPT</abbr></th>
            <td>ü</td>
            <td>iu</td>
            <td>ue / ië</td>
            <td>öa</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th rowspan="2">Stem 0</th>
            <th><abbr>PRC</abbr></th>
            <td>o</td>
            <td>oi</td>
            <td>uo / öä</td>
            <td>oe</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th><abbr>CPT</abbr></th>
            <td>ö</td>
            <td>ou</td>
            <td>uö / öë</td>
            <td>öe</td>
        </tr>
        </tbody>
    </table>
</div>