---
title: 09 Referentials
---

## 9.0 Referentials {#Sec9}

Referentials function much like personal pronouns in other languages, although they are more dynamic in their morphology. There are ten Referentials, each distinguishing three Effects (see [Sec. 5.4](05#Sec5_4) for an explanation of Effect).

## 9.1 Single-Referent Referential {#Sec9_1}

The structure of a Single-Referent Referential is as follows, where `C₁` is a consonantal form indicating the particular party being referenced, and `Vc₁` is a vocalic affix representing the case of the referent (using the same 68 `Vc` case-affixes from formative Slot IX). Note that combinations are permissible in Slot 1 (e.g., **smlo** <q>you (sg.) and (s)he and I</q>-ERGATIVE) as long as the combination is phonotactically permissible. The epenthetic -**ë**- vowel appears before or within `C₁` combinations if necessary due to phonotactic rules (e.g., **zëmse** <q>it and s/he and you(sg.)</q>-ABS), and may also be suffixed to Slot 4 if necessary for phonotactic purposes. A second case may be stacked on Referent A by filling in Slot 3 but leaving Slot 4 empty.

::: tabs

@tab 1

<span class="t">(ë)<code>C₁</code>((ë)<code>C₁</code>((ë)<code>C₁</code>))</span>

Referentials A

@tab 2

<span class="t"><code>Vc₁</code></span>

Case of Referential A

Same affixes as formative Slot IX

:::

The C₁ values themselves and their meaning are shown below:

<div class="table-11">

| EFFECT | NEUTRAL | BENEFICIAL | DETRIMENTAL |
| :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: |
| 1m | l | r | ř |
| 2m | s | š | ž |
| 2p | n | t | d |
| ma | m | p | b |
| pa | ň | k | g |
| mi | z | ţ | ḑ |
| pi | ẓ | f | v |
| Mx | c | č | j |
| Rdp| th | ph | kh |
| Obv| ll / lç/* | rr / rç/* | řř / řç/* |
| PVS| mm / mç/* | nn / nç/* | ňň / ňç/* |

</div>

\* the alternate forms of the <abbr>Obv</abbr> and <abbr>PVS</abbr> categories are used in Referential Affixes (see Sec. 4.6.5 below) to avoid ambiguity with geminated `Ca` forms

::: tabs

@tab 1m

<span class="t">monadic speaker</span>

<q>I</q>

@tab 2m

<span class="t">monadic addressee</span>

<q>you (sg.)</q>

@tab 2p

<span class="t">polyadic addressee</span>

<q>you (pl.)</q>

@tab ma

<span class="t">monadic animate 3rd party</span>

<q>he / she / they (sg.)</q>

@tab pa

<span class="t">polyadic animate 3rd party</span>

<q>they (pl.)</q>

@tab mi

<span class="t">monadic inanimate 3rd party</span>

<q>it</q>

@tab pi

<span class="t">polyadic inanimate 3rd party</span>

<q>these things / those things</q>

@tab Mx

<span class="t">mixed animate/inanimate 3rd party</span>

Mixed animate+inanimate, e.g., <q>s/he+it</q>, <q>they+those</q>, <q>it+they</q>, <q>those+s/he</q>, etc.

@tab Rdp

<span class="t">Reduplicative</span>

(i.e., resumptive)

refers back to the previously named party (often used with <abbr>SWR</abbr> affix)

@tab Obv

<span class="t">Obviative</span>

3rd-party other than one previously referenced <ins>aka so-called “4th person”</ins>

@tab PVS

<span class="t">Provisional</span>

<q>whatever</q> [see Sec. 9.3 below]

:::

To show AGGLOMERATIVE or NOMIC or ABSTRACT categories as a Referential, add the following affixes immediately preceding or following one of the affixes above (as phonotactically permissible):

* AGGLOMERATIVE: -**ļ**- / -**tļ**-
* NOMIC: -**ç**- / -**x**-
* ABSTRACT: -**w** / -**y**

## 9.2 Dual-Referent Referential {#Sec9_2}

If there are two or more personal referents and each has a different case, this can be shown using a Dual-Referent Referential whose structure is shown below:

::: tabs

@tab 1

<span class="t">(ë)<code>C₁</code>((ë)<code>C₁</code>((ë)<code>C₁</code>))</span>

Referentials A

@tab 2

<span class="t"><code>Vc₁</code></span>

Case of Referential A

Same affixes as formative Slot IX

@tab 3

<span class="t">(w/y + <code>Vc₂</code></span>

Case of Referential B, or in absence of Referential B, to add (i.e., stack) a 2nd Case on to Referential A. Same affixes as formative Slot IX

@tab 4

<span class="t">(<code>C₂</code>(ë)))</span>

Referentials B

@tab 5

<span class="t"><code>STRESS</code></span>

**monosyllabic** or **penultimate** = default

**ultimate** = adjunct carries <abbr>RPV</abbr> Essence \*

:::

Examples: *ëztewim*, *zëmse*, *smoyút*, *triwejvë*

For personal referents other than the MONADIC speaker ‘I’, if represented by a single consonant, one may show two separate (i.e., different) instances of that referent in one category by placing one instance of the consonant in Slot 1, and another in Slot 4, e.g., **püwüp** [ma/BEN/DAT-ma/BEN/DAT] ‘to him/her and to (a different) him/her’, **zäwiez** [mi/INS-mi/TRA] ‘with it and for (a different) it’.

Note that this dual-referent Referential structure can instead be used to stack a second case onto a single referent by filling in Slot 3 but leaving Slot 4 empty. Examples: *laiwe*, *smeʼe*, *kaʼu*, *foʼweʼis* (Note that the last three of these examples illustrate that [Sec. 2.2, Rule 3](02#Sec2_2), applies to Slot 2 `Vc₁` and Slot 3 `Vc₂` for Cases 37 through 52.)

The tell-tale sign of a Referential (i.e., what distinguishes its phonological structure from a formative) is its **(ë)C(C)-V** or **(ë)C(C)-V-w/y-V-C** structure (Formative Slot II has no `Vv` value -**ë**- nor any Slot IV `Ca` value containing -**w**- or -**y**-).

## 9.3 The Provisional Referential {#Sec9_3}

The <abbr>PVS</abbr> Provisional Referential refers to a vague, unspecified, potential, uncertain or unknown party/entity which can be marked for case. Ostensibly, the closest English translation would be “whatever.” However, since the identity of the entity is provisional/potential/uncertain, the focus of the personal reference is on the case-relationship being expressed, so that the meaning of the case often determines the proper English translation. For example, in phrases/sentences using <abbr>IRG</abbr> Illocution, the Referential would correspond most closely to an English WH-interrogative pronoun such as <abbr>PVS-LOC</abbr> <q>where?</q> (“whatever location”), <abbr>PVS-PUR</abbr><q>why?</q> (“whatever purpose”), <abbr>PVS-PRP</abbr> <q>whose?</q> (“whatever owner”), etc.

::: note

For more information on New Ithkuil equivalents to English WH-interrogatives, see [Sec. 10.6](10#Sec10_6).

:::

## 9.4 Impersonal and Abstract Reference {#Sec9_4}

To express impersonal referential categories such as “one”, “someone”, “something”, “a thing”, “things”, etc., add the NOMIC affix above to the <abbr>ma</abbr> or <abbr>mi</abbr> referential affixes above, depending on the intended meaning. Applying the ABSTRACT affix to a tangible Referential form gives a word meaning *“all that X is”* or *“everything about X”* as in *“all about me”*, *“everything having to do with you”* or *“everything about it”*. When appled to the <abbr>Mx</abbr> Referential, the ABSTRACT affix gives the meaning *“everything and everyone”* or *“all that there is”*.

## 9.5 Combination Referential with Case-Stacking {#Sec9_5}

A third Referential structure exists called a Combination Referential. It is used to add Case, Specification, `VxCs` affix information or a second case (case-stacking) to one of the Referential forms. The tell-tale signs of this adjunct are the Slot 4 consonant-forms containing -**x**-, -**xt**-, -**xp**-, or -**xx**- in what looks like the `Ca` slot of a formative (these four consonant conjuncts are not possible `Ca` forms). Examples: *slex*, *poxtanz*, *ëtkexpa*, *ëlsuoxxéd*.

::: tabs

@tab 1

<span class="t">(ë-) + <code>C₁</code> (+ <code>C₂</code> (+ <code>C₃</code> ))</span>

Combination Referential

@tab 2

<span class="t"><code>Vc</code></span>

Case of Combination Referential: from formative Slot IX

@tab 3

<span class="t">x / xt / xp / xx</span>

Specification of Combination Referential

* **x** = <abbr>BSC</abbr>
* **xt** = <abbr>CTE</abbr>
* **xp** = <abbr>CSV</abbr>
* **xx** = <abbr>OBJ</abbr>

@tab 4

<span class="t">(<code>VxCs</code>…)</span>

`VxCs` affix(es)

@tab 5

<span class="t">(<code>Vc₂</code> or epenthetic -a)</span>

2nd (stacked) case of Combination Referential IX: same affixes as formative Slot IX except for <abbr>THM</abbr> case = -**üa**

@tab 6

<span class="t"><code>Stress</code></span>

**Penultimate stress** = default

**Ultimate stress** = adjunct has <abbr>RPV</abbr> Essence.

:::

## 9.6 Applying Carrier, Quotative, Naming, and Phrasal Adjunct Forms to Referentials {#Sec9_6}

In addition to the Referential affixes shown in [Sec. 9.1](09#Sec9_1), the C₁ slot of the Single- or Dual-Referent Referential in [Sec. 9.2](09#Sec9_2) may also take any of the `Cp` Suppletive Adjunct affixes (**hl-, hm-, hn-, hň-**), thus allowing these adjuncts the same scope and flexibility as Referentials in terms of showing Specification, `VxCs` affixes, and case-stacking for a following proper noun, foreign word/phrase, or quote.

::: warning NOTE

When using a `Cp` Suppletive Adjunct form in Slot 1 of a Referential it is necessary to prefix the `Cp` form by an epenthetic vowel, as follows:

* If using a `Cp` Suppletive Adjunct form in Slot 1 of a Combination Referential from [Sec. 9.5](09#Sec9_5) above, the `Cp` value must be preceded by **a**- to avoid the adjunct being mistaken for a Concatenated Formative.

* If using a `Cp` Suppletive Adjunct form in Slot 1 of a Single- or Dual-Referential from [Sec. 9.1](09#Sec9_1) and [Sec. 9.2](09#Sec9_2) above, the `Cp` value must be preceded by the word-initial diphthong **üo**- to avoid the adjunct being mistaken for a Modular Adjunct.

:::