---
title: 10 Special Constructions
---

## 10.0 Special Constructions {#Sec10}

This chapter provides details on certain specialized grammatical constructions by which the languages convey certain kinds of information. Most of these specialized constructions constitute alternative or “short-cut” means of expressing more long-winded “standard” constructions, although some represent standard expressions in and of themselves.

## 10.1 Concatenation and Format {#Sec10_1}

Many languages, including English, are able to combine two separate meanings into a single verb, a process termed **conflation**. This is illustrated in the following English sentences:

<div class="indent">

1. <q>He bicycled south</q> = He traveled south by bicycle.
2. <q>She dolled herself up</q> = She made herself look as pretty as a doll.
3. <q>They’re shelving the books</q> = They’re putting the books on the shelf/shelves.
4. <q>Slide me a beer</q> = Give me a beer by sliding it (e.g., along the bar)

</div>

The above sentences show four verbs which respectively carry inherent senses of vector movement, transformation, positioning/placement, and giving. The patterning of such “conflated” verbs is usually random and haphazard in any given language. For example, the English *to bicycle* in sentence (1) means ‘to travel by means of bicycle,’ not ‘to make a bicycle’ or ‘to be a bicycle.’ On the other hand, the verb *to doll up* does not mean to ‘travel by doll,’ but rather ‘to make appear like a doll.’ Yet, *to shelve* means ‘to place on a shelf,’ not ‘to travel by means of shelves’ or ‘to make appear like a shelf.’ And none of the verbs in the first three sentences connotes the idea of giving or conveyance as does *slide* in sentence (4).

As can be seen, verb conflation is essentially a “short-cut” way of combining an unspoken primary verbal sense (such as movement, transformation, placement, giving, etc.) with an overtly expressed verb that conveys a secondary sense such as means, manner, or location. This can be formally notated for our four sentences above as follows:

<div class="indent">

* He [1: (TRAVEL+past tense) south] [2: (BY-MEANS-OF) bicycle]
= *He bicycled south.*
* She [1: (CAUSE-TO-RESEMBLE+past tense+reflexive)] [2: (IN-THE-MANNER-OF) doll]
= *She dolled herself up.*
* They [1: (PUT+progressive) the books] [2: (TO-LOCATION-OF) shelves]
= *They’re shelving the books.*
* [1: (GIVE+imperative)] a beer [2: (BY-MEANS-OF) sliding] to me
= *Slide me a beer.*

</div>

Note that the particular unspoken covert and overt senses (shown by the numerals 1 and 2 in the above analyses) are specific to any given verb and must be subjectively learned by the listener, i.e., a speaker of English must learn that *to hand* means to GIVE by MEANS of one’s hand, but *to shoulder* does not mean to GIVE by MEANS of one’s shoulder.

Thus, while conflation of verbs presents a potential opportunity for instantiating verbs with patterns of overt and covert meaning, the lack of systemization prevents one from knowing with certainty what pattern to use when attempting to interpret the usage of a verb form.

New Ithkuil systemizes verb conflation into a productive scheme, in which any formative can be concatenated directly with another formative (termed the parent formative). The operational sense of the concatenated formative and its semantic relation to the parent formative is conveyed by its case-affix in Slot IX. The concatenated formative is placed immediately preceding the parent formative, and is structured as a regular formative, able to take any and all morphology as appropriate and semantically permissible for the concatenated pair as a whole. The concatenated formative also shows one of the following eight `Cc` values in Slot I to indicate that it and the following formative constitute a concatenated pair. The meaning of the different `Cc` values is explained below the table.

<div class="table-3">

| | Slot IX = `Vf` | + w-form of `Ca` shortcut\* | + y-form of `Ca` shortcut\* |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| Type-1 Concatenation | h | hl | hm |
| Type-2 Concatenation | hw | hr | hn |

</div>

\* See [Sec. 3.10](03#Sec3_10) for an explanation of the **w**- and **y**- `Ca` shortcuts

#### Format

Note that for a concatenated formative, the Slot IX case affix is labeled `Vf` rather than `Vc` to stand for the term **Format**. Although `Vf` affixes are the same as `Vc` case affixes and represent the same 68 noun cases from Chapter 4 above, the term Format rather than Case is used to differentiate the fact that the case relationship is performing a different function. Specifically, the Format specifies the semantic relationship the concatenated formative has *with the immediately-following parent formative*, as opposed to signifying any case relationship it has to the rest of the sentence (which is the purpose of the Slot IX `Vc` / `Vk` affix in the parent formative).

#### Alternate `Vf` Indicator

Concatenated formatives do not use a glottal-stop in the Slot IX `Vf` form for Cases 37 through 68 (i.e., the Relational, Affinitive, Spatio-Temporal I, or Spatio-Temporal II cases). Instead, the concatenated formative takes ultimate syllabic stress to indicate that the Slot IX `Vf` Format vowel is actually a Format 37-through-68 form but without the glottal stop. Also, both Case No. 1 <abbr>THM</abbr> and Case No. 37 <abbr>PRN</abbr> can elide their -**a**- phonological marker; the latter only as long as the resulting word bears ultimate syllabic stress and is not mono-syllabic. Before eliding the -**a**-, External Juncture requirements as per [Sec. 11.8](11#Sec11_8) must be taken into account. A monosyllabic concatenated formative is to be interpreted as an unframed nominal formative bearing case (whereas a monosyllabic parent or standalone formative is interpreted as a verbal formative).

### 10.1.1 Concatenation Type {#Sec10_1_1}
As seen in the above table, there are two types of concatenation. Type-1 concatenation implies a circumstantial relationship between the concatenated formative and the parent (equivalent to placing the concatenated formative into a case-frame). Type-2 concatenation is derivational (i.e., lexicalizing), creating a new lexico-semantic gestalt usually requiring a different English translation. This is analogous to English forms like *polar bear* naming a new animal rather than stating a location. Likewise, English *elephant seal* establishes a new lexico-semantic gestalt rather than describing some sort of metaphorical relationship between elephants and seals.

### 10.1.2 `Ca` Shortcut Indicator for Concatenated Formative {#Sec10_1_2}

Columns 2 and 3 of the above table are used if the Slot IV `Vr` value is default -**a**- <abbr>STA/BSC/ESS</abbr> and the Slot VI `Ca` affix is one of eight specific `Ca` values shown for Slot II as previously described in [Sec. 3.10](03#Sec3_10).

### 10.1.3 Concatenation Chain {#Sec10_1_3}

More than two formatives may be concatenated to form the equivalent of phrasal concatenation or a concatenation chain. The initial concatenated formative of the chain indicates the Concatenation Type (1 or 2) for the entire chain; all subsequent concatenated formatives of the chain take one of the Type-1 `Cc` values from the table above. The final parent formative of the chain has either empty Slot I or takes w- or y- in Slot I if a `Ca` shortcut is present (see [Sec. 3.10](03#Sec3_10))

::: warning Revisor’s Comment About Scoping in Concatenation Chain

When each concatenated formative marked with default Case-Scope, They modify the parent formative, as like the parent formative were a main verb and they were the arguments thereof.

:::

### 10.1.4 Romanized Orthography for Concatenated Formatives {#Sec10_1_4}

In addition to the presence of a `Cc` affix in Slot I of a concatenated formative, the two (or more) formatives are joined by a hyphen in the language’s romanization scheme as a simple mnemonic indicator that they are a concatenated pair or concatenated chain.

### 10.1.5 Examples of Concatenated Formatives in Use {#Sec10_1_5}

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Hlellwoehú-alxwädé</dt>
      <dd><b>[default Ca]/CONCATENATED-Stem.2/PRC:“be.bright”-SPL-RLT-PARENT:“state.of.star.shining”-CTE-PRX-PUP</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>hla</dt>
      <dd>CARRIER</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Siryus</dt>
      <dd>“Sirius”</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>afthiliʼa</dt>
      <dd>“sky”-OBJ-[default Ca]-LOC</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>elnedaʼo.</dt>
      <dd>Stem.2/PRC-“nighttime”-CSV-PRX-CNR</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>Sirius is the brightest star in the night sky.</q></div>
</div>

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Hlaçköé-yeřdöʼe</dt>
      <dd><b>[default Ca]-CONCATENATED:PRC-“illness”-PCR-PARENT:PRX-Stem.2/PRC-“recuperate”-PCR</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>arţtudeuyá</dt>
      <dd>“study”-DYN-PRX-RGR-OBS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>kšilu</dt>
      <dd>“clown”-OBJ-[default Ca]-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>ažtwaʼra.</dt>
      <dd>“poison”-G-PRN</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>After recovering from an illness, the clown got back to studying poisons.</q></div>
</div>

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Ätruleowá</dt>
      <dd>CPT-“translative.motion”-DYN-[default Ca]-CUL-OBS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>dře</dt>
      <dd>2p+1m/DET-ABS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Hakšivé-Warswiʼa.</dt>
      <dd><b>CONCATENATED:“clown”-OBJ-N-COR-PARENT:[default Ca]-PRC-“planet”-LOC</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>We eventually wound up on the Clown Planet.</q></div>
</div>

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Hlešvie-galoktähá</dt>
      <dd><b>CONCATENATED/[default Ca]:Stem.2/PRC-“self-involved.leisure.activity”-PUR+PARENT:“ambulation”-[default Ca]-TPP₁/7-PRL-FAC-OBS</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>praʼi.</dt>
      <dd>ma/BEN+1m/BEN-ACT</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>She and I are (planning on) taking a walk later on.</q></div>
</div>

## 10.2 The Carrier Root {#Sec10_2}

Proper nouns such as personal and place names, as well as words from other languages are morpho-phonologically incompatible with New Ithkuil’s slot-based agglutinative morphology, as such names and foreign words might easily be mistaken for homophonous or nearly-homophonous New Ithkuil words, giving rise to semantic nonsense. Nevertheless, such words can be morphologically manipulated like any other Ithkuil formative by means of the “carrier” root -**S**-. By placing proper nouns and foreign words/phrases immediately following one of the three stems of the carrier root, a listener/reader is signaled by the morphology that the word is not to be interpreted as a New Ithkuil formative, adjunct, or referential.

<tooltip label="[the “carrier” root]">-S-</tooltip>

::: tabs

@tab Stem 1

<div class="indent">

<dl>
    <dt><abbr>BSC</abbr></dt>
    <dd>[carrier stem representing an animate being named by the succeeding foreign or proper name/phrase]</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>CTE</abbr></dt>
    <dd>[carrier stem representing the identity of the animate being named by the succeeding foreign or proper name/phrase]</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>CSV</abbr></dt>
    <dd>[carrier stem representing the physical presence/body of the animate being named by the succeeding foreign or proper name/phrase]</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>OBJ</abbr></dt>
    <dd>that which is impacted/targeted or a patient of the animate being named named by the succeeding foreign or proper name/phrase</dd>
</dl>

</div>

@tab Stem 2

<div class="indent">

<dl>
    <dt><abbr>BSC</abbr></dt>
    <dd>[stem representing inanimate object or abstract entity named by the succeeding foreign or proper name/phrase]</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>CTE</abbr></dt>
    <dd>[stem representing the identity of the inanimate object or abstract entity named by the succeeding foreign or proper name/phrase]</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>CSV</abbr></dt>
    <dd>[stem representing the physical presence or body of the inanimate entity or tangible manifestation/effect of the abstract entity named by the succeeding foreign or proper name/phrase]</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>OBJ</abbr></dt>
    <dd>that which is impacted/targeted or a patient of the inanimate or abstract entity named by the succeeding foreign or proper name/phrase</dd>
</dl>

</div>

@tab Stem 3

<div class="indent">

<dl>
    <dt><abbr>BSC</abbr></dt>
    <dd>[stem representing geographical or geo-demographic place/location named by the succeeding foreign or proper name/phrase]</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>CTE</abbr></dt>
    <dd>[stem representing the identity of the geographical or geo-demographic place/location named by the succeeding foreign or proper name/phrase]</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>CSV</abbr></dt>
    <dd>[stem representing the physical/tangible praxes and/or tangible infrastructure of the geographical or geo-demographic place/location named by the succeeding foreign or proper name/phrase]</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>OBJ</abbr></dt>
    <dd>that which is impacted/targeted or a patient of the geographical or geo-demographic place/location named by the succeeding foreign or proper name/phrase</dd>
</dl>

</div>

:::

The carrier stem is placed immediately before the proper noun or foreign word or phrase, then declined or conjugated normally for any desired morphological categories, even verbal categories. The proper noun or foreign word or phrase itself is left unchanged. The non-Ithkuil word or phrase is pronounced with either high or rising tone on its last syllable, in order to clue the listener that the following syllable/word returns to being Ithkuil. Alternately, the end of the word or phrase can be signaled by the use of the <abbr>END</abbr> register adjunct (explained in [Sec. 8.3](08#Sec8_3))

The carrier root in front of the names of persons also serves to function as a title of address corresponding to English <q>Mister, Ms. or Miss.</q>. There is no distinction of gender or marital status conveyed by the term.

If the proper noun or foreign word/phrase is already known to the listener/addressee, instead of utilizing a carrier stem, the speaker can instead employ the carrier adjunct (see [Sec. 8.4.1](08#Sec8_4_1))

## 10.3 Specialized `Cs`-Roots in Lieu of Affix-Scoping Adjuncts {#Sec10_3}

In the absence of a convenient semantic root, or as an alternative to using Affixual Adjuncts (see [Sec. 8.1](08#Sec8_1)), a special formative structure, the <b>Specialized `Cs`-Root</b>, exists to raise a `VxCs` affix to the level of a root. This formative structure operates like a standard formative except that Slots II and IV take specialized `Vv` and `Vr` forms and the Slot III `Cr` form is replaced by the `Cs`-form of a `VxCs` affix. The specifics are as follows:

<div class="table-3">
  <table>
    <caption>Slot II <code>Vv</code> Indicating a Specialized <code>Cs</code>-Root <wbr>(i.e., that Slots III + IV constitute a <code>CsVx</code> affix)</caption>
    <thead>
      <tr>
        <th><code>Vv</code></th>
        <th colspan="2">Function</th>
      </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <th>Version</th>
        <th><abbr>STA</abbr></th>
        <th><abbr>DYN</abbr></th>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <th><abbr>PRC</abbr></th>
        <td>ëi</td>
        <td>eë</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <th><abbr>CPT</abbr></th>
        <td>ëu</td>
        <td>oë</td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</div>

These four specialized `Vv` values signal that the following consonantal form in Slot III is not a `Cr` form from the Lexicon, but rather the `Cs`-form of a `VxCs` affix. This functions to convert the meaning of the `VxCs` affix to the status of a lexical root. Due to this conversion into a root, no Type-1 vs. Type-2 affixual distinction is made.

Note that such specialized `Cs` -roots do not take Slot I `Cc` values indicating Slot IV/VI a+ `Ca` shortcuts but can take the four Slot I `Cc` values that indicate concat-enation only (see [Sec. 10.1](10#Sec10_1) on Concatenation): **h**-, **hw**-, plus these two forms with ultimate stress.

The Affix-Degree and Specification of the Specialized `Cs`-root is shown by the `Vr` value in Slot IV:

<div class="table-3">
  <table>
    <caption>Slot IV <code>Vr</code> Values for the Specialized <code>Cs</code>-Root</caption>
    <thead>
      <tr>
        <th rowspan="2">Affix Degree</th>
        <th colspan="4">Context</th>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <th><abbr>EXS</abbr></th>
        <th><abbr>FNC</abbr></th>
        <th><abbr>RPS</abbr></th>
        <th><abbr>AMG</abbr></th>
      </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <th>1</th>
        <td>a</td>
        <td>ai</td>
        <td>ia / uä</td>
        <td>ao</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <th>2</th>
        <td>ä</td>
        <td>au</td>
        <td>ie / uë</td>
        <td>aö</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <th>3</th>
        <td>e</td>
        <td>ei</td>
        <td>io / üä</td>
        <td>eo</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <th>4</th>
        <td>i</td>
        <td>eu</td>
        <td>iö / üë</td>
        <td>eö</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <th>5</th>
        <td>ëi</td>
        <td>ëu</td>
        <td>eë</td>
        <td>oë</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <th>6</th>
        <td>ö</td>
        <td>ou</td>
        <td>uö / öë</td>
        <td>öe</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <th>7</th>
        <td>o</td>
        <td>oi</td>
        <td>uo / öä</td>
        <td>oe</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <th>8</th>
        <td>ü</td>
        <td>iu</td>
        <td>ue / ië</td>
        <td>öa</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <th>9</th>
        <td>u</td>
        <td>ui</td>
        <td>ua / iä</td>
        <td>oa</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <th>0</th>
        <td>ae</td>
        <td>ea</td>
        <td>üo</td>
        <td>üö</td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</div>

Note that, unlike Slot IV of standard formatives, all nine tiers of the Standard Vowel Sequence are utilized in these Specialized `Cs` -roots. As the category of Specification does not apply to `VxCs` affixes, these Specialized `Cs` -roots are considered to have <abbr>BSC</abbr> Specification only.

Examples:

<div class="indent">
  <dl class="gloss">
    <dt>Oërmöliohá</dt>
    <dd><b>Cs-ROOT:ITN₁/6-OBS</b></dd>
  </dl>
  <dl class="gloss">
    <dt>zvalauswu.</dt>
    <dd>“dog”-[default Ca]-ca:PRP-IND</dd>
  </dl>
  <div class="glend"><q>The dog’s owner has returned.</q></div>
  <dl class="gloss">
    <dt>Iuprulövḑuadnó</dt>
    <dd>Stem.3/CPT/NEG₁/4-“descend”-DYN-ASC₁/6-OGC₃/9-CVN</dd>
  </dl>
  <dl class="gloss">
    <dt>walxu</dt>
    <dd>[default Ca]-PRC-“Sol”-IND</dd>
  </dl>
  <dl class="gloss">
    <dt>ëivḑilamkiʼa</dt>
    <dd><b>Cs-ROOT:ASC₁/4-FGN₂/1-LOC</b></dd>
  </dl>
  <dl class="gloss">
    <dt>lei.</dt>
    <dd>1m-GEN</dd>
  </dl>
  <div class="glend"><q>They say down south the sun wonʼt set on my home town.</q></div>
</div>

## 10.4 Specialized Referential Roots {#Sec10_4}

Another type of special formative structure is the Specialized Referential Root. This structure operates like a standard formative except that Slot II takes specialized `Vv` values which indicate that the immediately following Slot III `Cr` form has been replaced by a Single-Referent Referential affix (see [Sec. 9.1](09#Sec9_1_1)), including combination Referential “clusters” such as -**sml**- ‘you(sg.), s/he/they(sg.) and I’. The specifics are as follows:

<div class="table-3">
  <table>
    <caption>Slot II <code>Vv</code> Values Indicating a Specialized Referential Root <wbr>(i.e., Slot III constitutes a Referential Affix)</caption>
    <thead>
      <tr>
        <th>Version</th>
       <th><code>Vv</code></th>
      </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <th><abbr>PRC</abbr></th>
        <td>ae</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <th><abbr>CPT</abbr></th>
        <td>ea</td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</div>

Slot IV values for these Specialized Referential roots are the same as for standard formatives, showing Function, Specification, and Context for the Referential.

Referential clusters requiring an epenthetic -**ë**- vowel cannot be used in these Specialized Referential roots.

NOTE: Specialized Referential roots can take Slot I `Cc` values indicating Slot IV/VI a + `Ca` shortcuts; however, because -**ae**- and -**ea**- are the only the two values allowed in Slot II, the only a + `Ca` shortcuts available are `Ca` = [default] and `Ca` = <abbr>PRX</abbr>.

Also: because the Referential affixes themselves refer to Referentials irrespective of number, the meaning of each stem of the Specialized Referential Root changes depending on its Perspective, as previously discussed in Sec. 4.6. Therefore, one should not attach the usual NOMIC affix -**ç**- / -**x**- or the ABSTRACT affix -**w** / -**y** to the Referential affix itself (as when using a Referential); instead, show NOMIC or ABSTRACT Referential forms using the appropriate `Ca` Perspective value in Slot VI of the formative.

Specifications and Verbal Meaning: Because they are full roots, these Specialized Referential root require that a meaning be assigned to the four Specifications, as well as meanings assigned to verbal forms. These are illustrated below for the <abbr>1m</abbr> MONADIC speaker category:

::: tabs

@tab Nominal meaning

<dl>
    <dt>BASIC</dt>
    <dd>“I (myself)”</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt>CONTENTIAL</dt>
    <dd>“I (myself)” (as being my personality, mind, psyche, sentient thoughts, psychological sense of individuality, or “essence”; irrespective of my physical body)</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt>CONSTITUTIVE</dt>
    <dd>“I (myself)” (as my physical body/embodiment/person, irrespective of personality, mind, psyche, sentient thoughts, psychological sense of individuality, or “essence”)</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt>OBJECTIVE</dt>
    <dd>“entity with/on which I act or with which I associate (i.e., place, thing, person, etc. with/in/on which/whom I [inter-]acts)”; “something/someone from/in my life/niche/environment”</dd>
</dl>

@tab Verbal meaning

<dl>
    <dt>BASIC</dt>
    <dd>“to be me/to be myself”, “to do/act what/how I do [because it’s me]”</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt>CONTENTIAL</dt>
    <dd>[same as above applied to CONTENTIAL meaning at left]</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt>CONSTITUTIVE</dt>
    <dd>[same as above applied to CONSTITUTIVE meaning at left]</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt>OBJECTIVE</dt>
    <dd>“to be an entity in my life/niche/environment; to be something/someone that/who is in my life/niche/environment”</dd>
</dl>

:::

::: note Revisor’s Comment

Personal-Reference is obsolete term of Referential.

Specialized Referential roots have only one stem.

:::

## 10.5 Use of Type-3 `VxCs` Affix Format and Standard Vowel-Sequence Column 4 Vowels as Shortcut for Referentials {#Sec10_5}

If either of a formative’s `VxCs` affix slots, Slots V or VII, are empty, then that empty slot may be used to show a specialized short-cut “Referential affix.” The affix consists of a `Cs` consonant that is any one of the 30 Referential consonant-forms from the table in [Sec. 9.1](09#Sec9_1_1), combined with is a standard Type-3 `Vx` vowel-form corresponding to the nine `Vx` affix-degrees shown below. It is the appearance of a lone Type-3 `VxCs` affix without any adjacent Type-1 or Type-2 affix for it to apply to, that triggers its interpretation as this specialized Referential affix.

Additionally, Column 4 vowel-forms from the Standard Vowel-Sequence may be employed as shortcuts for the Transrelative cases regardless of other `VxCs` affixes being present in the same Slot.

<div class="t">Slot V or VII <code>Vx</code> Values Indicating a Referential Shortcut</div>

::: tabs

@tab can only be used if no other `VxCs` affix is in the same Slot

<dl>
    <dt>POSSESSIVE <abbr>POS</abbr></dt>
    <dd>ia / uä</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt>PROPRIETIVE <abbr>PRP</abbr></dt>
    <dd>ie / uë</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt>GENITIVE <abbr>GEN</abbr></dt>
    <dd>io / üä</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt>ATTRIBUTIVE <abbr>ATT</abbr></dt>
    <dd>iö / üë</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt>PRODUCTIVE <abbr>PDC</abbr></dt>
    <dd>eë</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt>INTERPRETATIVE <abbr>ITP</abbr></dt>
    <dd>uö / öë</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt>ORIGINATIVE <abbr>OGN</abbr></dt>
    <dd>uo / öä</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt>INTERDEPENDENT <abbr>IDP</abbr></dt>
    <dd>ue / ië</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt>PARTITIVE <abbr>PAR</abbr></dt>
    <dd>ua / iä</dd>
</dl>

@tab can be used regardless of other `VxCs` affixes present

 <dl>
    <dt>THEMATIC <abbr>THM</abbr></dt>
    <dd>ao</dd>
</dl>
 <dl>
    <dt>INSTRUMENTAL <abbr>INS</abbr></dt>
    <dd>aö</dd>
</dl>
 <dl>
    <dt>ABSOLUTIVE <abbr>ABS</abbr></dt>
    <dd>eo</dd>
</dl>
 <dl>
    <dt>AFFECTIVE <abbr>AFF</abbr></dt>
    <dd>eö</dd>
</dl>
 <dl>
    <dt>STIMULATIVE <abbr>STM</abbr></dt>
    <dd>oë</dd>
</dl>
 <dl>
    <dt>EFFECTUATIVE <abbr>EFF</abbr></dt>
    <dd>öe</dd>
</dl>
 <dl>
    <dt>ERGATIVE <abbr>ERG</abbr></dt>
    <dd>oe</dd>
</dl>
 <dl>
    <dt>DATIVE <abbr>DAT</abbr></dt>
    <dd>öa</dd>
</dl>
 <dl>
    <dt>INDUCIVE <abbr>IND</abbr></dt>
    <dd>oa</dd>
</dl>

:::

## 10.6 Equivalents to English WH-Questions {#Sec10_6}

There are various equivalent constructions available to form the equivalent of an English WH-question. One method is to not ask a question at all, but rather to use a verb such as ‘state’ or ‘say/tell’ in DIRECTIVE Illocution to express a command that the addressee provide the information being sought, i.e, <q>Tell me your name</q> as opposed to <q>What is your name?</q>. Another equivalent to WH-questions is to use the <abbr>PVS</abbr> Referential in conjunction with the <abbr>IVL₁/4</abbr> affix -**inļ** indicating INTERROGATIVE Illocution so that the <abbr>PVS</abbr> Referential functions much like an English interrogative pronoun. Examples:

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Mmiexinļ</dt>
        <dd>PVS​-PUR​-(IRG)</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>Why?</q><br>[i.e., For what purpose?]</div>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Mmaʼoxinļ</dt>
        <dd>PVS​-CNR​-(IRG)</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>When?</q></div>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Nnioxinļ</dt>
        <dd>PVS.BEN​-TRA​-(IRG)</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>To/for whose benefit? / To the benefit of what?</q></div>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Ňňeöxinļ</dt>
        <dd>PVS.DET​-RSL​-(IRG)</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>Resulting (detrimentally) in what? / With what undesirable result?</q></div>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Mmauxinļ</dt>
        <dd>PVS​-PRP​-(IRG)</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>Whose? / Belonging to what?</q></div>
</div>

Finally, one can form the equivalent of WH-questions using INTERROGATIVE Illocution in conjunction with a formative affixed with Degrees 1, 2, 3, 8 or 9 of the <abbr>PTN</abbr> affix shown below. When used this way, the formative carrying the <abbr>PTN</abbr> affix must be marked as the semantic focus of the sentence (i.e., it must either immediately precede the verb in terms of word-order or it must carry the <abbr>TPF/9</abbr> affix).

::: details <span class="t">-sv | <abbr>PTN</abbr> | <tooltip label="Potential">Potential</tooltip></span>

1. whatever X is / whatever X may be
2. whatever X was or may have been (but is no more)
3. whatever X will be or may become (but is not yet)
4. ...or something like/similar to X in function, purpose, or consequence
5. ...or something like/similar to X in appearance/description
6. and whatever else X may be(come)
7. and whatever else X entails or carries with it as a consequence
8. which(ever) X (it is or may be) [i.e., of a known/limited number of possible identifications available to assign to X, the one identification that actually is (chosen as) X]
9. what(ever) X (it is or may be) [i.e., of an unknown number of possible identifications one might/could assign to X, the one identification that actually is (chosen as) X]

:::

Examples:

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Weilüsve</dt>
        <dd>S2.G-“human child”-<b>PTN/8₁</b>-ABS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>erčuléi</dt>
        <dd>S2-“corruption/subversion/undermining”-DYN-<b>IRG</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>kšilo?</dt>
        <dd>S1-“performing as a clown”-OBJ-ERG</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>Which of the children did the clown corrupt?</q></div>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Laluţkusvu</dt>
        <dd>S1-“adult human”-MAK/9₁-<b>PTN/9₁</b>-IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>utxoléi</dt>
        <dd>S3-“drinking liquid”-DYN.CSV-<b>IRG</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>akftyäloë?</dt>
        <dd>S1-“ammonia”-CTE-CSM</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>What kind of person drinks ammonia?</q></div>
</div>

## 10.7 Using Case on UNFRAMED Verbal Formatives {#Sec10_7}

Using the case-stacking affix (see [Sec. 7.6](07#Sec7_6)), a noun-case can be placed on an UNFRAMED verbal formative to give a meaning of “to be (something that is) X” where X is the formative modified by the case’s function. Such constructions can often substitute for case-frames. Examples:

DEPENDENT case:

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Abẓe</dt>
        <dd>MCS/1₁-{VIIDom}</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>willyothoilyá</dt>
        <dd>S2.CPT-“singing a song”-QUA/7₁-<b>(case:DEP)</b>-OBS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>utplaliör.</dt>
        <dd>S3-“self-confidence/self-esteem”-(1m.BEN-ATT)</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>My self-esteem is dependent upon (my) singing this song well.</q></div>
</div>

POSTCURSIVE case:

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>A</dt>
        <dd>RTR</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>hrelu-azčojhaillöelyá</dt>
        <dd>T2-S2-“human child”-IND—S1-“self-centered”-DYN.CSV-CRL/1₂-{Ca}-<b>(case:PCR)</b>-OBS</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>It was after the child pulled a tantrum.</q></div>
</div>

TRANSFORMATIVE case:

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>Kšölaölwáu</dt>
        <dd>S1-“performing as a clown”-DYN.OBJ-<b>(case:TFM)</b>-DEC</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
        <dt>wele</dt>
        <dd>S2-“human child”-ABS</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>The child is hereby transformed into a clown!</q> (more literally: <q>It is transformation into a clown that is declared to happen to the child!</q>)</div>
</div>

## 10.8 Equivalent to English “Strings” of Adverbial Locative Particles {#Sec10_8}

English has the seemingly unique ability to create succinct “moving images” of complex trajectories, paths, treks, and in-situ movements by simple juxtaposition of locative/directional particles (i.e., prepositions acting mostly as adverbial particles). For example, imagine the manager of a basement nightclub talking to a friend on the sidewalk outside his club. He invites the friend to the balcony outside the back of the club, which one gets to by descending into the club, going past the dance floor, up a flight of stairs, then along a hallway to the back door. He does so by saying the following sentence to his friend, containing a string of nine prepositions (the first eight of which are functioning as adverbial particles):

::: center

<q>Come on down inside, up along through out back to the balcony.</q>

:::

New Ithkuil allows a speaker to create similar succinct “moving images”. Each motion root (whether referring to in-situ or translative motion) has a corresponding `VxCs` affix of the same form (e.g., for the root -**KR**- ‘OBLIQUE LINEAR MOTION’, there is a corresponding affix -**kr**). Each of these affixes has the following nine degrees:

::: details Degree Of Motion Affix

1. **Motion through X**. Specifically, interior perlative motion/movement in a manner described by the affix’s corresponding root among/within an external/surrounding/underlying (quasi-)static medium. For translative motion affixes, implies motion along a course described by the affix’s corresponding root where the course is set, determined, or prescribed by an externally surrounding/underlying medium/channel, etc.
2. **Motion like X, inside something**. Specifically, interior motion/movement: in-situ or translative movement/motion in a manner described by the affix’s corresponding root while inside another entity (where, unlike Degree 1, the exterior object/entity does not define/prescribe/determine the course of the moving object/entity.)
3. **Motion into X**. Implies entry from an exterior space/medium/context into an interior space/medium/context
4. **Motion like X**; for translative motion affixes, **motion along X**. Implies continued/continuous movement in a manner described by the affix’s corresponding root; for translative motion affixes, implies continued/continuous motion along a course/direction described by the affix’s corresponding root
5. **Motion like X from one point (across) to another**. Implies a single motion in a manner described by the affix’s corresponding root from one point/side of the contextual space to another; for translative motion affixes, implies a single motion along a course/direction described by the affix’s corresponding root across a gap/gulf/space from one place to another.
6. Translative Motion = **move onward**; Positional: **X/Y/Z position of X**. For translative motion affixes, signifies motivational “on” as in “come on”, “go on”, “move on” - implies/reinforces need/impetus to begin/keep moving in the manner or direction described by the affix’s corresponding root without stopping. For static positional affixes, operates merely as a locative to specify an entity’s X/Y/Z position.
7. **Motion out of X**. Implies exit from an interior space/medium/context out to an exterior space/medium/context
8. **Motion like X, on the outside of something**. Exterior motion/movement: in-situ or translative movement/motion in a manner described by the affix’s corresponding root while outside another object/entity (where, unlike Degree 9, the other object/entity does not define/prescribe/determine the course of the moving object/entity)
9. **Motion alongside X**. Specifically, exterior perlative motion/movement outside of, over, next to, alongside, “above”/“under” an adjacent (quasi-)static surface/medium; for translative motion affixes, implies motion on a course described by the affix’s corresponding root along, over, parallel to, around, “above”/“under”, or tracking/following an adjacent (quasi-)static surface/medium

:::

For Degree 6, the various Modulative affixes as well as Phase can be used to describe repeated, ongoing movement/motion, e.g., back-and-forth, to-and-fro, side-to-side, up-and-down, in-and-out, out-and-back, etc.

Besides movement/motion Roots, roots denoting any spatial referent/area also have corresponding affix-forms utilizing this pattern, e.g., front side, rear area, top area/space, area below/underneath, etc.

#### Translative Motion Roots

Roots involving translative motion are modeled after the following basic root:

<tooltip label="PATH-ORIENTED, QUASI-LINEAR TRANSLATIVE MOTION">-TR-</tooltip> | affix: <abbr>M01</abbr>

::: tabs

@tab Stem 1

<div class="indent">

<dl>
    <dt><abbr>BSC</abbr></dt>
    <dd>act of translative motion from one spacetime location to another; to move from one place to another [both the motion and the entity moving]</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>CTE</abbr></dt>
    <dd>The process of movement itself from one place to another; to be moving from one place to another [focus on the movement, not the entity moving]</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>CSV</abbr></dt>
    <dd>The path/trajectory/course/route followed between two places; to move along/through the path/trajectory/course/route from one place to another</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>OBJ</abbr></dt>
    <dd>The entity moving from one place to another; to be the entity moving from one place to another</dd>
</dl>

</div>

@tab Stem 2

<div class="indent">

<div class="glend">As per Stem 1 w/ perspective is on motion to(ward) the topical referent of the sentence or clause, i.e., “come; approach”; CPT = “arrive”</div>

</div>

@tab Stem 3

<div class="indent">

<div class="glend">As per Stem 1 w/ perspective is on motion away from the topical referent of the sentence or clause, i.e., “go; go away; move away”; CPT = “leave; depart”</div>

</div>

:::

Roots (and affixes) following the same model as -**TR**- above include the following:

::: tabs

@tab -R series

<tooltip label="VERTICAL QUASI-LINEAR TRANSLATIVE MOTION">-PR-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 1</dt>
    <dd>i.e., movement up/down</dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 2</dt>
    <dd>ascent/ascend; going (straight) up; rise/raise/elevate</dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 3</dt>
    <dd>descent/descend; going (straight) down; “drop”; lower(ing)</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

-----

<tooltip label="OBLIQUE VERTICAL QUASI-LINEAR MOTION">-KR-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 1</dt>
    <dd>i.e., ascending/descending at an angle/slant</dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 2</dt>
    <dd>oblique ascent, upward incline, uphill</dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 3</dt>
    <dd>oblique descent, downward incline, downhill</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

-----

<tooltip label="HORIZONTAL PLANAR TRANSLATIVE MOTION">-DR-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 1</dt>
    <dd>i.e., movement along a line/path on a horizontal plane between the topical referent and a second location</dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 2</dt>
    <dd>approach, getting nearer</dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 3</dt>
    <dd>recede/receding, getting farther away</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

-----

<tooltip label="PARALLEL TRANSLATIVE MOTION">-FR-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 1</dt>
    <dd>i.e., movement along same path/trajectory as the topical referent</dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 2</dt>
    <dd>parallel movement in same direction alongside topical referent</dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 3</dt>
    <dd>parallel movement alongside but in opposite direction to topical referent</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

-----

<tooltip label="PERPENDICULAR-PLANAR TRANSLATIVE MOTION">-BR-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 1</dt>
    <dd>i.e., movement along a line/path “across” one’s forward path or field of vision, moving laterally (i.e., horizontally perpendicular) to the positional/orientational position or path of the topical referent (i.e., analogous to watching something moving in a line across a screen held in front of one’s eyes)</dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 2</dt>
    <dd>movement from left-to-right relative to the topical referent</dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 3</dt>
    <dd>movement from right-to-left relative to the topical referent.</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

-----

<tooltip label="OBLIQUE LATERAL TRANSLATIVE MOTION">-GR-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 1</dt>
    <dd>i.e., moving laterally at an oblique angle on same horizontal plane as the topical referent</dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 2</dt>
    <dd>lateral movement at an oblique angle approaching (i.e., getting nearer to) the topical referent</dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 3</dt>
    <dd>lateral movement at an oblique angle moving away from (getting farther away from) the topical referent.</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

@tab -L series

<tooltip label="HORIZONTAL-PLANAR RANGE OF MOTION">-GL-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>i.e., random directed movement within/throughout a 2-dimensional horizontal plane.</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

-----

<tooltip label="VERTICAL-PLANAR RANGE OF MOTION">-DL-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>i.e., random directed movement within/throughout a 2-dimensional vertical plane.</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

-----

<tooltip label="PERPENDICULAR-PLANAR RANGE OF MOTION">-KL-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>i.e., random directed movement within/throughout a 2-dimensional vertical plane perpendicular to the perspective of the topical referent (i.e., lying “across” one’s visual field or directional path, analogous to a painting or flat screen held up in front of a person).</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

-----

<tooltip label="TRANSLATIVE MOTION ALONG PARABOLIC/ARC-LIKE TRAJECTORY RELATIVE TO GRAVITY">-PL-</tooltip> {.indent}

-----

<tooltip label="MOTION IN A CURVE">-BL-</tooltip> {.indent}

-----

<tooltip label="MOTION IN A PLANAR CIRCULAR PATH">-FL-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 2</dt>
    <dd>counter-clockwise motion, relative to the speaker/observer</dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
    <dt>Stem 3</dt>
    <dd>clockwise motion, relative to the speaker/observer</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

-----

<tooltip label="GENERIC/OBLIQUE 3-DIMENSIONAL RANGE OF MOTION">-TL-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>i.e., 3-D pervasive movement throughout or within a volume of space</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

:::

::: note

When using the affix-form of the above fourteen roots, to specify the Stem 2 meaning of the respective root, add -**w** to the affix form, e.g., -**tr** becomes -**trw**, -**kl** becomes -**klw**. To specify the Stem 3 meaning of the respective root, add -**y** to the affix form, e.g., -**tr** becomes -**try**, -**kl** becomes -**kly**.

:::

#### Spatial Position/Location Roots

::: details -Ţ- <tooltip label="SPATIAL POSITION, LOCATION, ORIENTATION, DIRECTION">SPATIAL POSITION, LOCATION, ORIENTATION, DIRECTION</tooltip> | affix: <abbr>P01</abbr>

Stem 1

<div class="indent">

<dl>
    <dt><abbr>BSC</abbr></dt>
    <dd>spatial position of an entity; to be situated/located at</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>CTE</abbr></dt>
    <dd>The act of physically occupying a/the position/location in space; to physically occupy a/the position in space</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>CSV</abbr></dt>
    <dd>A/the position/location in space occupied by an entity; to be a/the position/location in space</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>OBJ</abbr></dt>
    <dd>The entity situated/located at; to be that which is situated/located at</dd>
</dl>

</div>

Stem 2

<div class="indent">

<div class="glend">Direction relative to the observer (i.e., linear directional path between an object and the observer)</div>

</div>

Stem 3

<div class="indent">

<div class="glend">the opposing direction or direction from which something emerges/originates/appears, etc.</div>

</div>

Stem 0

<div class="indent">

<div class="glend">Area, general vicinity of a particular position/location relative to the observer, whether 2-dimensional or 3-dimensional according to the situational context</div>

</div>

:::

Roots following the same model as -Ţ- above include the following based on a 3-dimensional X/Y/Z axial grid:

::: tabs

@tab Simple position

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / 0 / 0">-Ḑ-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>i.e., “right here”; at the center point of the observer’s 3-dimensional spatial frame of reference.</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / 0 / +Z">-ŢY-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“above the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / 0 / -Z">-ŢW-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“below the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / +Y / 0">-P-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“in front of the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / -Y / 0">-K-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“behind the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / 0 / 0">-F-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the right of the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / 0 / 0">-V-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the left of the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

@tab Double position combination

For mnemonic convenience, combinations of the above positional concepts are designated by corresponding combinations of the phonemes of the above X/Y/Z roots (-**ŢY**- and -**ŢW**- are shortened to -**Y** and -**W**):

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / +Y / +Z">-PY-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“in front of and above the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / +Y / -Z">-PW-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“in front of and below the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / -Y / +Z">-KY-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“behind and above the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT 0 / -Y / -Z">-KW-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“behind and below the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / +Y / 0">-FP-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the right and in front of the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / -Y / 0">-FK-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the right and behind the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / 0 / +Z">-FY-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the right and above the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / 0 / -Z">-FW-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the right and below the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / +Y / 0">-VB-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the left and in front of the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / -Y / 0">-VG-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the left and behind the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / 0 / +Z">-VY-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the left and above the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / 0 / -Z">-VW-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the left and below the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

@tab Triple position combination

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / +Y / +Z">-FPY-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the right, in front, and above the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / +Y / -Z">-FPW-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the right, in front, and below the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / -Y / +Z">-FKY-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the right, behind, and above the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT +X / -Y / -Z">-FKW-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the right, behind, and below the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / +Y / +Z">-VBY-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the left, in front, and above the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / +Y / -Z">-VBW-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the left, in front, and below the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / -Y / +Z">-VGY-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the left, behind, and above the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/LOCATION AT -X / -Y / -Z">-VGW-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>“to the left, behind, and below the observer”</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

@tab BETWEEN/AMIDST/AMONG

<tooltip label="POSITION BETWEEN/AMIDST/AMONG [IN A QUASI-PLANAR CONTEXT]">-PK-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>e.g., among others in a crowded room</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION BETWEEN/AMONG [IN A LINEAR UNIDIMENSIONAL CONTEXT]">-DK-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>e.g., between two others in a queue</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="INDEFINITE POSITION AMIDST/AMONG [IN A 3-DIMENSIONAL VOLUME]">-TK-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>e.g., among a sky full of balloonists</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/STATE INTERTWINED/INTERMINGLED/INTERMIXED IN 2-DIMENSIONAL PLANAR CONTEXT [INDIVIDUAL COMPONENTS SEPARABLE/EXTRACTABLE]">-ḐD-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>e.g., the red marbles amidst a tabletop covered with different colored marbles</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/STATE INTERTWINED/INTERMINGLED/INTERMIXED IN 3-DIMENSIONAL VOLUME [INDIVIDUAL COMPONENTS SEPARABLE/EXTRACTABLE]">-ḐB-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>e.g., the red marbles within a jar full of different colored marbles</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/STATE INTERTWINED/INTERMINGLED/INTERMIXED IN 2-DIMENSIONAL PLANAR CONTEXT [INDIVIDUAL COMPONENTS INSEPARABLE/PERMANENTLY COMBINED]">-ḐV-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>e.g., yellow paint spread onto a blue canvas to make a green area</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

----

<tooltip label="POSITION/STATE INTERTWINED/INTERMINGLED/INTERMIXED IN 3-DIMENSIONAL VOLUME [INDIVIDUAL COMPONENTS INSEPARABLE/PERMANENTLY COMBINED]">-ḐG-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>e.g., sugar granules poured into a cup of coffee</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

:::

#### Positionally-Defined Componential Parts of a Whole

As seen above, Stem 3 of -**F**- type spatial position roots convey the meaning of “the area/vicinity around X”, so that the Stem 3 root of -**K**- above would mean “the area behind or in back (of)”. Nevertheless, separate roots exist to describe positionally-defined componential parts of an entity, to distinguish “the area behind or in back of” from “the rear/back part/side of” where the latter refers to a part of the entity itself. This allows one to distinguish phrases such as “behind the box” from “the back/rear side of the box.”

<tooltip label="POSITIONALLY-DEFINED COMPONENTIAL PART">-ŢF-</tooltip> | affix: <abbr>S08</abbr>

::: tabs

@tab Stem 1

<div class="indent">

<dl>
    <dt><abbr>BSC</abbr></dt>
    <dd>positionally-defined part/section of an entity (e.g., side, front, top, bottom, rear, etc.); to be a positionally-defined part/section of an entity</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>CTE</abbr></dt>
    <dd>The state/act of physically being/doing what a positionally-defined part/section of an entity is/does; to physically be/do what a positionally-defined part/section of an entity is/does</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>CSV</abbr></dt>
    <dd>A/the (relative) spatial position/location which defines/delineates a part/section of an entity; to be a/the spatial position/location which defines/delineates a part/section of an entity</dd>
</dl>
<dl>
    <dt><abbr>OBJ</abbr></dt>
    <dd>The entity of which the componential part/section is a part; to be the entity of which the componential part/section is a part</dd>
</dl>

</div>

@tab Stem 2

<div class="indent">

<div class="glend">Inalienable, inherent, inseparable, “built-in” component part/section in relation to the whole</div>

</div>

@tab Stem 3

<div class="indent">

<div class="glend">Alienable, separable, detachable component part/section in relation to the whole</div>

</div>

:::

Roots (and affixes) following the same model as -**ŢF**- above are as follows:

::: tabs

@tab 1

<tooltip label="LINEAR UNI-DIMENSIONAL MIDDLE, CENTER [AS SEEN PARALLEL TO LONG AXIS OF ENTITY (OR HEIGHT-AXIS OF A “TALL” ENTITY)]">-CL-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="LINEAR UNI-DIMENSIONAL MIDDLE, CENTER [AS SEEN PERPENDICULAR TO LONG AXIS OF ENTITY (OR HEIGHT-AXIS OF A “TALL” ENTITY)]">-CR-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="PLANAR 2-DIMENSIONAL MIDDLE, CENTER [RUNNING VERTICALLY AND LATERALLY PARALLEL TO LONG (OR TALL) SIDE OF ENTITY]">-ẒL-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="PLANAR 2-DIMENSIONAL MIDDLE, CENTER [RUNNING VERTICALLY PARALLEL BUT LATERALLY PERPENDICULAR TO LONG (OR TALL) SIDE OF ENTITY]">-ẒR-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="PLANAR 2-DIMENSIONAL MIDDLE, CENTER [RUNNING VERTICALLY AND LATERALLY PERPENDICULAR TO LONG (OR TALL) SIDE OF ENTITY]">-ẒW-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="CENTER POINT OF AN ENTITY">-CW-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>i.e., the zero-dimensional point most equidistant from all points on the periphery or surface of an entity</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

@tab 2

<tooltip label="SIDE/FLANK OF AN ENTITY">-FḐ-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="FRONT PART OF AN ENTITY [RELATIVE TO ITS DIRECTIONAL ORIENTATION OR PRIMARY EXTERNAL INTERFACE]">-PF-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="REAR/BACK PART OF AN ENTITY [RELATIVE TO ITS DIRECTIONAL ORIENTATION OR PRIMARY EXTERNAL INTERFACE]">-KF-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="TOP/PEAK/SUMMIT OF AN ENTITY [RELATIVE TO ITS TYPICAL ORIENTATION UNDER GRAVITY]">-DY-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="BOTTOM/FOUNDATION OF AN ENTITY [RELATIVE TO ITS TYPICAL ORIENTATION UNDER GRAVITY]">-DW-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="UPPER PART/“HALF” OF AN ENTITY [RELATIVE TO ITS TYPICAL ORIENTATION UNDER GRAVITY]">-ḐY-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="LOWER PART/“HALF” OF AN ENTITY [RELATIVE TO ITS TYPICAL ORIENTATION UNDER GRAVITY]">-ḐW-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="INTERIOR/INTERNAL VOLUME/“INSIDE(S)”/“INNARDS” OF AN ENTITY">-XW-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="INTERIOR SURFACE OR “WALL” / INTERNAL SURFACE OR “WALL” / THE INSIDE SURFACE OR “WALL” OF AN ENTITY">-XL-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="EXTERIOR/EXTERNAL SURFACE/“OUTSIDE”/“SKIN” OF AN ENTITY">-XR-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

@tab 3

The following roots are also modeled on the same root -**TR**-, even though they do not specify a particular spatial position relative to the whole:

<tooltip label="EXTERNAL POINT-LIKE OUTWARD-FACING VERTEX/“CORNER” OF AN ENTITY">-XḐ-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="EXTERNAL QUASI-LINEAR EDGE OF AN ENTITY">-XT-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="EXTERNAL QUASI-LINEAR JOINING OF SURFACES/“SEAM” OF AN ENTITY">-XK-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="EXTERNAL ATTACHMENT POINT OR FASTENING MECHANISM OF AN ENTITY">-XF-</tooltip> {.indent}
<div class="indent">
  <dl>
    <dt>Meaning</dt>
    <dd>i.e., handle, hook, latch, velcro patch, knob, peg, etc.</dd>
  </dl>
</div>

<tooltip label="INTERNAL POINT-LIKE INTERIOR VERTEX/“CORNER” OF AN ENTITY">-ČḐ-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="EXTERNAL LINEAR OUTWARD-FACING “CORNER” EDGE OR “CORNER” SPACE OF AN ENTITY">-XḐR-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

<tooltip label="INTERNAL LINEAR INTERIOR “CORNER” EDGE OR “CORNER” SPACE OF AN ENTITY">-ČḐR-</tooltip> {.indent}

----

:::

Examples:

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Etrulökryekrwitrokfái</dt>
      <dd>Stem.2-PRC-“translative.motion”-DYN-[default Ca]-<b>M03y₁/6-M03w₁/3-M01₁/4-S17₁/7</b>-DIR
</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>wakçmiʼo.</dt>
      <dd>[default Ca]-PRC-“outdoor.balcony”-ALL</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>Come on down inside, up along through out back to the balcony.</q></div>
</div>

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Hlurmiô-igulotruxröxḑuökfái.</dt>
      <dd>[default Ca]/CONCATENATED:Stem.3-PRC-“house”-ABL-PARENT:Stem.2-CPT-“ambulate”-DYN-[default Ca]-<b>M01₁/7-S24₁/9-S25₁/6-S17₃/6</b>-DIR</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>Go run outside along the wall until you reach the back outside corner of the house.</q></div>
</div>

