---
title: 08 付属詞
---

## 8.0 Adjuncts {#Sec8}

Adjuncts were introduced in [Sec. 2.5](02#Sec2_5). They are placed adjacent to a formative to provide further grammatical or semantic information about the formative. There are seven types of Adjuncts: Affixual, Modular, Register, Suppletive,<del> Mood/Case-Scope,</del>[^1] Bias, and the Parsing Adjunct, each explained in the sub-sections below.

[^1]: In fact, it has been withdrawn and replaced by Modular and Affixual Adjuncts.

## 8.1 Affixual Adjuncts {#Sec8_1}

As an alternative to placing `VxCs` affixes within Slots V or VII of a formative, such affixes may instead by shown by means of adjuncts placed immediately preceding the formative with which they are associated (unless the formative would otherwise be the last word of a sentence, in which case the adjunct may be placed after the formative if desired). There are two types of affixual adjuncts: a single-affix adjunct and a multiple-affix adjunct, as explained below.

### 8.1.1 Single-Affix Adjunct {#Sec8_1_1}

This adjunct associates a single `VxCs` affix to the following formative and provides scoping information over the formative’s other `VxCs` affixes. The tell-tale sign of this adjunct is the V-C-(V) form containing only one full consonant-form. Examples: *ač*, *iakse*, *etra*, *usmú*, *aull*.

::: tabs

@tab ʼ + `VxCs`

Single standard `VxCs` affix

@tab `Vs`

The following values ​​indicate the affix:

* (**a**) : applies to Stem only (not to its `Ca`) & has scope over all Slot V affixes (i.e., as if it were the last affix in Slot V)
* **u** : applies to Stem only (not to its `Ca`) & is subordinate to all Slot V affixes (i.e., as if it were the first affix in Slot V)
* **e** : applies to both Stem and `Ca` & has scope over all Slot VII affixes (i.e., as if it were the last affix in Slot VII)
* **i** : applies to both Stem and `Ca` & is subordinate to all Slot VII affixes (i.e., as if it were the first affix in Slot VII)
* **o** : has scope over the entire formative as a whole, including Valence, Mood or Case, Illocution/Validation, etc.
* **ö** : has scope over the entire formative as a whole as well as other adjacent adjuncts including a modular adjunct

@tab Stress

* Penultimate stress : default
* Ultimate stress : affix applies to concatenated <del>stem</del> <ins>formative</ins> only

:::

Example:

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Adři</dt>
      <dd><b>SBS₁/1-[Slot.VII/1st.position]</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Wimžuowêi</dt>
      <dd>[default Ca]-/CPT-“sexual.relations”-EPD-USP</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>muyum.</dt>
      <dd>ma-IND+IND-ma</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>They had sex in a hurry.</q></div>
</div>

### 8.1.2 Multiple-Affix Adjunct {#Sec8_1_2}

This adjunct associates two or more affixes to a formative. The tell-tale sign is that the second consonant-form will consist <ins>of one of the non-root consonant forms **h**, **ʼh**, **ʼhl**, **ʼhr**, **hw**, or **ʼhw**.</ins><del>either of -**h**- or a non-root consonant preceded by a glottal-stop (**ʼh**, **ʼw**, **ʼy**, **ʼhw**, **ʼhl**, or **ʼhr**)</del>. Examples: *dohast*, *<ins>stei’haikra</ins><del>stei’yaikra</del>*, *<ins>ëjgi’hloftôm</ins><del>ëjgi’woftôm</del>*, *via’hwobrigli*.

::: tabs

@tab (ë-) + `CsVx`

Single reversed `CsVx` affix.

Initial `Cs` may be preceded by ë- if phonotactically necessary

@tab `Cz`

The following values ​​indicate the preceding affix:

* **h** : applies to stem (not to its `Ca`) & has scope over all Slot V affixes (i.e., as if it were the last affix in Slot V)
* **ʼh** : applies to stem (not to its `Ca`) & is subordinate to all Slot V affixes (i.e., as if it were the first affix in Slot V)
* **ʼhl** : applies to both Stem and `Ca` & has scope over all Slot VII affixes (i.e., as if it were the last affix in Slot VII)
* **ʼhr** : applies to both Stem and `Ca` & is subordinate to all Slot VII affixes (i.e., as if it were the first affix in Slot VII)
* **hw** : has scope over the entire formative as a whole, including Valence, Mood or Case, Illocution/Validation, etc.
* **ʼhw** : has scope over the entire formative as a whole as well as other adjacent adjuncts including a modular adjunct

@tab `VxCs` …

Standard `VxCs` affix(es)

@tab `Vz`

The following values ​​indicate the 2nd and subsequent affixes:

* **a** : apply to stem (not to its `Ca`) & have scope over all Slot V affixes (i.e., as if they were the last affix in Slot V)
* **u** : apply to stem (not to its `Ca`) & are subordinate to all Slot V affixes (i.e., as if they were the first affix in Slot V)
* **e** : apply to both Stem and `Ca` & have scope over all Slot VII affixes (i.e., as if they were the last affix in Slot VII)
* **i** : apply to both Stem and `Ca` & are subordinate to all Slot VII affixes (i.e., as if they were the first affix in Slot VII)
* **o** : have scope over the entire formative as a whole, including Valence, Mood or Case, Illocution/Validation, etc.
* **ö** : have scope over the entire formative as a whole as well as other adjacent adjuncts including a modular adjunct
* (**ai**) : have the same scope as shown by `Cz`

@tab Stress

* Penultimate stress : default
* Ultimate stress : affix applies to concatenated <del>stem</del> <ins>formative</ins> only

:::

A Type-3 `VxCs` affix used in an affixual adjunct associates to the `VxCs` affix named by `Vz`, e.g., if `Vz` = a, it associates to the last affix in Slot V.

Example:

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Wütruöwá</dt>
      <dd>[default Ca]-Stem.3/CPT-“go.away”-LIM-OBS</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>kru</dt>
      <dd>pa+1m/BEN/IND</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>ëţcëuʼhlievče</dt>
      <dd><b>EML₂/5-[Slot.VII/last.position]-AVS₃/2-[Slot.VII/last.position]</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>kšireö.</dt>
      <dd><b>LIM</b>“clown”-OBJ-G-RSL</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>We left just in time to avoid being turned into clowns.</q></div>
</div>

## 8.2 Modular Adjuncts {#Sec8_2}

This adjunct has two slots corresponding to formative Slot VIII (showing Valence, Phase, Level, or Effect, in combination with Mood/Case-Scope, or showing Aspect plus Mood/Case-Scope); it can also show a single lone Aspect. When used with concatenated <del>formatives</del> <ins>pair or chain</ins>, it normally applies to both the concatenated and parent <del>stems</del> <ins>formatives</ins> but can be marked to apply to either one separately. The tell-tale sign of this adjunct is the absence of any full consonant forms other than possibly a single -**n**- or -**ň**-; the only otherwise permissible consonants are -**w**-, -**y**-, or a form consisting of or beginning with -**h**-.

The structure of the adjunct is shown below. Slots 2 and 3 can be “mixed and matched” to show any combination of the Slot VIII categories, including differing iterations of the same category (e.g., to show multiple aspects). Slots 1 and 4 are mandatory; the other slots are optional. Default <abbr>MNO-FAC/CCN</abbr> Valence+Mood/Case-Scope is zero-marked in Slot 2. Information in each successive slot scopes over the previous slot, but the adjunct as a whole does not have scope beyond its default formative Slot VIII, unless the `Vh` value in Slot 4 of the adjunct indicates a different and specialized pattern of scoping.

Structure of a Modular Adjunct

::: tabs

@tab 1

ʼ / w- / y-

* **ʼ** = default
* **w** = adjunct applies to the parent formative only
* **y** = adjunct applies to the concatenated formative only

@tab 2

( `VnCn`

Valence/Phase/Level/Effect + Mood/Case-Scope

`Cn` = **h / hl / hr / hm / hn / hň**

Aspect + Mood/Case-Scope

`Cn` = **w~y / hw / hrw / hmw / hnw / hňw**

@tab 3

( `VnCm` ))

`Vn` for Valence/Phase/Level/Effect or Aspect

If `Vn` represents an Aspect, `Cm` = **n**, otherwise `Cm` = **ň**

@tab 4

`Vn` or `Vh`

**Aspect** or **Valence/Phase/Level/Effect** or **Specialized Scope of the Adjunct**

* If only Slots 1 and 4 are filled, then Slot 4 = Aspect;
* If Slot 2 or Slots 2 and 3 are filled and stress is penultimate, then Slot 4 = Valence or Phase or Level or Effect;
* If Slot 2 or Slots 2 and 3 are filled and stress is ultimate, then Slot 4 = `Vh` whose values are shown below.

`Vh`

* **a** = affixes in Slots 2, 3, and 4 have successive right-to-left scope order over each other (Slot 2 < Slot 3 < Slot 4) and have scope over **Case/Mood** and **Validation + Illocution** <del>+ Expectation</del>
* **e** = affixes in Slots 2, 3, and 4 have successive right-to-left scope order over each other (Slot 2 < Slot 3 < Slot 4) and have scope over **Case/Mood**
* **i/u** = affixes in Slots 2, 3, and 4 have successive right-to-left scope order over each other (Slot 2 < Slot 3 < Slot 4) and have scope over the formative as a whole but not any adjacent affixual adjuncts (do not use if adjacent affixual adjunct’s `Vs`, `Cz`, or `Vz` values show scope over a modular adjunct)
* **o** = affixes in Slots 2, 3, and 4 have successive right-to-left scope order over each other (Slot 2 < Slot 3 < Slot 4) and have scope over the formative as a whole including any adjacent affixual adjuncts (do not use if adjacent affixual adjunct’s `Vs`, `Cz`, or `Vz` values show scope over a modular adjunct)

:::

::: warning NOTE

If formative Slot VIII shows default Valence + Mood/Case-Scope (and no Aspect, Phase, Level, or Effect values are shown), then any `VnCn` values in a modular adjunct apply as if they were the Slot VIII values. If the formative shows a non-default Slot VIII value for a certain category, and a modular adjunct shows a different value for the same category (assuming it even makes semantic sense to do so), the modular adjunct value scopes over the Slot VIII value.

:::

Example:

<div class="indent">
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>Wähňainui</dt>
      <dd><b>[Scope:PARENT]-PRL-HYP-RSM-FLC</b></dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>hlešvie-ellyulû</dt>
      <dd>CONCATENATED/[default Ca]:Stem.2/PRC-“self-involved.leisure.activity”-PUR+PARENT:[default Ca]-Stem.2/PRC-“sing.a.song”-DYN-ITU</dd>
    </dl>
    <dl class="gloss">
      <dt>praʼi.</dt>
      <dd>ma/BEN+1m/BEN-ACT</dd>
    </dl>
    <div class="glend"><q>She and I might’ve resumed randomly bursting into snippets of song for fun.</q></div>
</div>

## 8.3 Register Adjuncts {#Sec8_3}

The category of Register indicates the mode of personal communication of a word or sentence, the default unmarked value being a general NARRATIVE. Marked registers indicate intra-sentence or intra-NARRATIVE changes in the mode of personal communication to a mode other than a general NARRATIVE. These alternative modes of communication (i.e., non-NARRATIVE registers) include direct speech, a parenthetical “aside”, one’s personal cogitation/deliberation, or an unwilled or subjective impression.

Register is indicated by a specialized adjunct placed at the start of the word or phrase constituting the registered speech, followed by a counterpart adjunct placed immediately afterward to indicate the end of the registered speech. These adjuncts constitute a single vowel-form preceded by **h**-. A non-NARRATIVE register clause may be pronounced with low pitch on the last word of the clause, in which case the register clause does not require the end-register final adjunct listed below. If the word/phrase within the register is a proper name or foreign word/phrase, indicate this by ending the register clause using <abbr>END</abbr> the CARRIER-END register adjunct **hü**.

| Register | Definition | Initial Adjunct | Final Adjunct |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| NARRATIVE <abbr>DRR</abbr> | default register | — | — |
| DISCURSIVE <abbr>DSV</abbr> | direct speech | ha | (hai) |
| PARENTHETICAL <abbr>PNT</abbr> | parenthetical aside | he | (hei) |
| SPECIFICATIVE <abbr>SPF</abbr> | proper name of preceding referent[^2]| hi | (hiu) |
| EXEMPLIFICATIVE <abbr>EXM</abbr> | ‘for example, ...’ | ho | (hoi) |
| COGITANT <abbr>CGT</abbr> | silent/subjective thoughts | hu | (hui) |
| CARRIER-END <abbr>END</abbr> | end of term/phrase governed by carrier stem/adjunct[^3] | ∅ | (hü) |

[^2]: If the identification of the preceding referent is not a proper name, use <abbr>PNT</abbr> register instead.
[^3]: Use the <abbr>END</abbr> adjunct marker for any register where the referent within the register clause is a proper name or a foreign word/phrase.

::: warning Note

Since Sec. 1.5 external juncture rules do not apply to foreign names/words, insert a pause after uttering the name/words prior to the <abbr>END</abbr> adjunct **hü** or <abbr>SPF</abbr> final adjunct **hiu**, or pronounce the last word of the proper name/phrase with low tone.

:::

The Registers are explained in further detail below:

### 8.3.1 <abbr>NRR</abbr> Narrative {#Sec8_3_1}

The default register, indicating a general narrative statement. Also used for formal narration, as when telling the events a story from an omniscient narrator’s perspective. Unmarked.

### 8.3.2 <abbr>DSV</abbr> Discursive {#Sec8_3_2}

Indicates a phrase/statement represents direct speech, as in <q>His wife turned to him and said <b><q>You’ve forgotten your hat.</q></b></q>

### 8.3.3 <abbr>PNT</abbr> Parenthetical {#Sec8_3_3}

Indicates a phrase/statement is a parenthetical aside, or the equivalent to an in-line footnote, as in

* <span class="glend">All equine species in Eurasia <b>(we needn’t bother with those in the Americas)</b> can be shown to be quadrupeds</span>
* <span class="glend">I generally prefer coffee to tea on summer afternoons <b>– over ice, of course –</b> but sometimes only a beer will do</span>
* <span class="glend">That artist’s landscapes <b>(you should see his portraits!)</b> are simply sublime.</span>

### 8.3.4 <abbr>SPF</abbr> Specificative {#Sec8_3_4}

Indicates the proper name of the immediately preceding referent. Note that if the identification of the preceding referent is not a proper name, use <abbr>PNT</abbr> register instead.

### 8.3.5 <abbr>EXM</abbr> Exemplificative {#Sec8_3_5}

Indicates the word/phrase constitutes an illustrative example for the preceding formative or phrase. Translates a clause in English beginning with ‘for example, ...’.

### 8.3.6 <abbr>COG</abbr> Cogitant {#Sec8_3_6}

Indicates a phrase/statement represents silent thoughts or beliefs. Equivalent to various devices in natural languages for indicating silent thoughts/beliefs within a narrative, as in the use of italics within a written paragraph, or the sudden interjection of a character’s disembodied voice on the soundtrack of a film/video while the character visually doesn’t open their mouth.

::: tip Revisor’s Additional Info

The IMPRESSIONISTIC register in Ithkuil 2011 <abbr>IPR</abbr> has been merged with the COGITANT.

IMPRESSIONISTIC (subjective impressions of the party referred to)

Description: Indicates a phrase/statement represents the imagination, subjective impressions, or unwilled “wandering” thoughts of the party being referenced in the phrase/statement. Equivalent in natural languages to a narrator suddenly interjecting a subjective description within a statement, as in <q>The little girl ran down the hillside, **a feeling of joy in her heart**, then leaped into the arms of her father.</q>

:::

### 8.3.7 <abbr>END</abbr> Carrier-End {#Sec8_3_7}

Indicates the end of a term or phrase governed either by the carrier stem or a carrier adjunct. Use the Carrier-End adjunct marker for any register where the referent within the register clause is a proper name or a foreign word/phrase. (See [Sec. 10.2](10#Sec10_2) regarding the Carrier Stem and [Sec. 8.4.1](08#Sec8_4_1) regarding the Carrier Adjunct).

## 8.4 Suppletive Adjuncts {#Sec8_4}

These are a series of adjuncts of the form `Cp + Vc` where `Cp` is a bi-consonantal form beginning with **h**- specifying the nature of the adjunct, while `Vc` is the case-marker from Formative Slot IX. The tell-tale sign of these adjuncts is **the initial h + consonant** with no subsequent consonant forms. The last word of the word, phrase or name identified by the adjunct can be indicated by the adjunct form **hü** if necessary, or by pronouncing that word/phrase/name with low tone.

Use of these adjuncts implies <abbr>CCN</abbr> Case-scope (<abbr>CCP/CCV</abbr> when in any Appositive/Associative/Relational case and unmarked with Case-scope); if the case-framed word/phrase/name has non-default Case-scope, use either a full carrier-stem or a preceding <ins>affixual</ins> adjunct to show the case-scope.

The `Cp` affix of these adjuncts may be used in the C₁ Slot of a Single-, Dual-, or Combination Referential (see [Sec. 9.5](09#Sec9_5)). When so used, the `Cp` affix must be preceded by a word-initial epenthetic vowel to avoid the adjunct being mistaken for a modular adjunct or a concatenated formative. See [Sec. 9.6](09#Sec9_6) for the specific rules involved.

### 8.4.1 <abbr>CAR</abbr> Carrier Adjunct {#Sec8_4_1}

This is a “shortcut” for a full carrier stem, providing Case information only. It is used when the identity/nature of the foreign word(s) or proper name following the adjunct is already known to the addressee.

::: tabs

@tab `Cp`

**hl**

@tab `Vc`

Same as Formative Slot IX

:::

Examples: *hla*, *hlei*, *hloa*, *hleʼe*, *hlaʼu*, *hliʼa*

### 8.4.2 <abbr>QUO</abbr> Quotative Adjunct {#Sec8_4_2}

This adjunct combines the Carrier Adjunct with the DISCURSIVE Register Adjunct to allow direct quotes to be placed within a case-frame, useful for translating imbedded quotes within sentences such as <q>He told me<b><q>get out of the house!</q></b></q>

::: tabs

@tab `Cp`

**hm**

@tab `Vc`

Same as Formative Slot IX

:::

Examples: *hma*, *hmei*, *hmoa*, *hmeʼe*, *hmaʼu*, *hmiʼa*

### 8.4.3 <abbr>NAM</abbr> Naming Adjunct {#Sec8_4_3}

Naming Adjunct <q>He said<b><q>Emily</q></b></q> as opposed to the sentence <q>He said<b><q>tell Emily</q></b></q> which would use the Quotative adjunct, or <q>He said to tell <b>Emily</b></q> which would use the Carrier adjunct.

::: tabs

@tab `Cp`

**hn**

@tab `Vc`

Same as Formative Slot IX

:::

Examples: *hna*, *hnei*, *hnoa*, *hneʼe*, *hnaʼu*, *hniʼa*

### 8.4.4 <abbr>PHR</abbr> Phrasal Adjunct {#Sec8_4_4}

This adjunct is essentially a specialized form of the carrier adjunct above to apply meta-level grammatical information to an entire subsequent phrase as a whole. This is similar to a case-frame, except that where case-frames function solely as an equivalent to subordinate clauses in Western languages, this adjunct causes the subsequent phrase to become a conventionalized, (quasi-)lexicalized gestalt. It thus serves as an equivalent to English phrasal gestalts (often hyphenated), as in the following examples:

* <span class="glend">Hey, <b>shit-for-brains</b>! Stop your <b>stumbling-around-in-the-dark</b> behavior and watch how the <b>know-how-to-get-things-done</b> guy gets it done!</span>
* <span class="glend">“Let the kid try, he’s from the neighborhood.” “O-oh! <b>“He’s from the neighborhood!”</b>”</span>
* <span class="glend">Is that the actor who starred in that <b>aliens-invade-but-die-after-discovering-chocolate</b> movie?</span>

::: tabs

@tab `Cp`

**hň**

@tab `Vc`

Same as Formative Slot IX

:::

Examples: *hňa*, *hňei*, *hňoa*, *hňeʼe*, *hňaʼu*, *hňiʼa*

## 8.5 Bias Adjuncts {#Sec8_5}

Bias adjuncts operate much like English “supra-segmental” interjections such as ‘Phew!’, ‘Damn!’, ‘tsk-tsk’, ‘Pssshhh’, ‘huh?’, ‘meh’, ‘hmmm’, etc. to establish a subjective “tone” or attitude toward a sentence as a whole. Unlike other adjuncts which function as substitutions for the morphological Slots within formatives, Bias adjuncts function independently from formatives and have semantic scope over the entire sentence <ins>when sentence-initially</ins> (again, much like Interjections in natural languages).

::: warning Revisor’s Additional Info

During development, the grammar design document describes its scoping as follows:

Sentence-initial Bias adjuncts scope over the entire sentence. Otherwise, they scope over the preceding formative. They should be pronounced with a preceding and following pause.

:::

Another unique quality of Bias adjuncts is that they violate the standard phonotactic rules of the language (again like the supera-segmental interjections of natural languages) by being purely consonantal in their phonetic make-up. They should be pronounced with a preceding and following pause. Each Bias adjunct has the same consonant-form as an associated lexico-semantic root phonologically structured to contain continuant and sonorant consonants so that when used as autonomous adjuncts, they may be pronounced in an exaggerated, prolonged fashion. Additionally, those ending in a voiceless stop or voiceless affricate may aspirate or even ejectivize the consonant. The Bias Adjuncts are listed below along with their meanings.

* <abbr>ACC</abbr> ACCIDENTAL: lf
    * <span class="glend"><q>As luck would have it...</q><wbr><q>Fate has decided that...</q><wbr><q>What luck!</q></span>
* <abbr>ACH</abbr> ARCHETYPAL: mçt
    * <span class="glend">what (a) ...!; how . . .! ; Boy! Did (does) X ever …</span>
* <abbr>ADS</abbr> ADMISSIVE : lļ
    * <span class="glend"><q>Mm-hm</q><wbr><q>Uh-huh</q><br>(said as mere acknowledgement of a statement without any implied agreement with or assent to the statement)</span>
* <abbr>ANN</abbr> ANNUNCIATIVE: drr
    * <span class="glend"><q>Guess what!</q> or <q>Wait till you hear this!</q></span>
* <abbr>ANP</abbr> ANTICIPATIVE: lst
    * <span class="glend"><q>Iʼm looking foward to this!</q></span>
* <abbr>APB</abbr> APPROBATIVE: řs
    * <span class="glend"><q>(That’s) OK</q><wbr><q>(That’s) alright</q><wbr><q>(That’s) good</q><wbr><q>(That’s) fine</q><wbr><q>Very well</q><wbr><q>Sure</q></span>
* <abbr>APH</abbr> APPREHENSIVE: vvz
    * <span class="glend"><q>Iʼm worried...</q><wbr><q>I’ve got a bad feeling about this...</q></span>
* <abbr>ARB</abbr> ARBITRARY: xtļ
    * <span class="glend"><q>..Yeah, whatever...</q><wbr><q>...Ah, what the hell, Iʼm going ahead and....</q></span>
* <abbr>ATE</abbr> ATTENTIVE: ňj
    * <span class="glend"><q>Well, whaddya know...</q><wbr><q>Well, will you look at that...!</q><wbr><q>Well, go figure...</q><wbr><q>Who would’ve thought...?</q><wbr><q>Well I’ll be!</q></span>
* <abbr>CMD</abbr> COMEDIC: pļļ
    * <span class="glend"><q>Funny!</q><wbr><q>LOL</q></span>
* <abbr>CNV</abbr> CONTENSIVE: rrj
    * <span class="glend"><q>Iʼm telling you...</q><wbr><q>I told you so!</q><wbr><q>You see?!</q></span>
* <abbr>COI</abbr> COINCIDENTAL: ššč
    * <span class="glend"><q>What a coincidence!</q></span>
* <abbr>CRP</abbr> CORRUPTIVE: gžž
    * <span class="glend"><q>How corrupt!</q><wbr><q>What corruption!</q></span>
* <abbr>CRR</abbr> CORRECTIVE: ňţ
    * <span class="glend"><q>that is to say…,</q><wbr><q>What I mean(t) to say is…</q><wbr><q>I mean….</q></span>
* <abbr>CTP</abbr> CONTEMPTIVE: kšš
    * <span class="glend"><q>What nonsense!</q> or <q>What bullshit!</q></span>
* <abbr>CTV</abbr> CONTEMPLATIVE: gvv
    * <span class="glend"><q>I wonder how…,</q><wbr><q>that’s odd…,</q><wbr><q>I don’t get it…,</q> or a quizzical <q>hmmmm.</q></span>
* <abbr>DCC</abbr> DISCONCERTIVE: gzj
    * <span class="glend"><q>Iʼm not sure about this.</q><wbr><q>I don’t feel comfortable about this.</q><wbr><q>Iʼm feeling out of my element here.</q></span>
* <abbr>DEJ</abbr> DEJECTIVE: žžg
    * <span class="glend"><q>(sigh)</q><br>[of dejection/disillusionment]</span>
* <abbr>DES</abbr> DESPERATIVE: mřř
    * <span class="glend"><q>I don’t know how to say this, but…</q><wbr><q>Iʼm afraid that….</q><wbr><q>Iʼm sorry to have to tell you, but...</q></span>
* <abbr>DFD</abbr> DIFFIDENT: cč
    * <span class="glend"><q>sorry, but…</q><wbr><q>It’s nothing. It’s just…</q></span>
* <abbr>DIS</abbr> DISMISSIVE: kff
    * <span class="glend"><q>Is that it?</q><wbr><q>Big deal!</q><wbr><q>So what!?</q></span>
* <abbr>DLC</abbr> DELECTATIVE: ẓmm
    * <span class="glend"><q>Whee!</q></span>
* <abbr>DOL</abbr> DOLOROUS: řřx
    * <span class="glend"><q>Ow!</q><wbr><q>Ouch!</q></span>
* <abbr>DPB</abbr> DISAPPROBATIVE: ffx
    * <span class="glend"><q>I dont like the fact that…</q><wbr><q>It bothers me that….</q><wbr><q>Unacceptable!</q><wbr><q>I hate it!</q></span>
* <abbr>DRS</abbr> DERISIVE: pfc
    * <span class="glend"><q>How foolish!</q><wbr><q>How silly!</q><wbr><q>Look at how foolish/silly/ridiculous this is!</q></span>
* <abbr>DUB</abbr> DUBITATIVE: mmf
    * <span class="glend"><q>Hmm, not likely.</q><wbr><q>I doubt it.</q><wbr><q>Sounds fishy to me</q><wbr><q>I don’t trust this/it/him/her/them...</q></span>
* <abbr>EUH</abbr> EUPHORIC: gzz
    * <span class="glend"><q>(Sigh) What bliss!</q></span>
* <abbr>EUP</abbr> EUPHEMISTIC: vvt
    * <span class="glend"><q>Let’s just say that….</q> or <q>Well, let me put it this way….</q></span>
* <abbr>EXA</abbr> EXASPERATIVE: kçç
    * <span class="glend"><q>Dammit!</q><wbr><q>Look, don’t you get it?…</q><wbr><q>Look, Iʼm trying to tell you….</q></span>
* <abbr>EXG</abbr> EXIGENT: rrs
    * <span class="glend"><q>It’s now or never!</q></span>
* <abbr>FOR</abbr> FORTUITOUS: lzp
    * <span class="glend"><q>It’s just as well that...</q> or <q>All’s well that ends well...</q></span>
* <abbr>FSC</abbr> FASCINATIVE: žžj
    * <span class="glend"><q>Cool!</q><wbr><q>Wow!</q><wbr><q>Awesome!</q></span>
* <abbr>GRT</abbr> GRATIFICATIVE: mmh
    * <span class="glend"><q>Ah! What bliss...!</q><wbr><q>Oh, there’s nothing like….</q><br>[physical pleasure only]</span>
* <abbr>IDG</abbr> INDIGNATIVE: pšš
    * <span class="glend"><q>The nerve!</q> or <q>How dare…!?</q></span>
* <abbr>IFT</abbr> INFATUATIVE: vvr
    * <span class="glend"><q>Praise be to...!</q><wbr><q>Oh, thank God for...!</q><wbr><q>There’s nothing more sacred/holy/important than...!</q></span>
* <abbr>IPL</abbr> IMPLICATIVE: vll
    * <span class="glend"><q>of course,</q><wbr><q>after all,</q><wbr><q>needless to say.</q></span>
* <abbr>IPT</abbr> IMPATIENT: žžv
    * <span class="glend"><q>Cʼmon!,</q><wbr><q>What’re you waiting for?</q><wbr><q>so…already!</q> as in the sentence <q>So dance already!</q></span>
* <abbr>IRO</abbr> IRONIC: mmž
    * <span class="glend"><q>Oh, nice!</q><wbr><q>Just great!</q><wbr><q>Well, now, isn’t this lovely!</q></span>
* <abbr>ISP</abbr> INSIPID: lçp
    * <span class="glend"><q>Meh... (said due to lack of interest)</q><wbr><q>How boring/tedious/dull!</q></span>
* <abbr>IVD</abbr> INVIDIOUS: řřn
    * <span class="glend"><q>Why does he/she/they get to... and I don’t?!</q><wbr><q>How unfair (that I don’t get to...)!</q></span>
* <abbr>MAN</abbr> MANDATORY: msk
    * <span class="glend"><q>take it or leave it,</q><wbr><q>this is your last chance,</q></span>
* <abbr>MNF</abbr> MANIFESTIVE: pss
    * <span class="glend"><q>Ah!</q><wbr><q>Well, now!</q><wbr><q>So!</q><br>[Italian <q>Allora!</q>]</span>
* <abbr>OPT</abbr> OPTIMAL: ççk
    * <span class="glend">prolonged <q>so</q> or <q>totally</q> as in <q>I so don’t care!</q> or <q>That is totally not what I meant.</q></span>
* <abbr>PES</abbr> PESSIMISTIC: ksp
    * <span class="glend"><q>Yeah, like it really matters that...</q><wbr><q>Pfft! What’s it to me?</q></span>
* <abbr>PPT</abbr> PROPITIOUS: mll
    * <span class="glend"><q>it’s a wonder that</q> as in <q>It’s a wonder he didn’t break a bone in that fall</q>.</span>
* <abbr>PPX</abbr> PERPLEXIVE: llh
    * <span class="glend"><q>Huh? What do you mean…?</q> <q>What the hell?</q> <q>WTF!?</q><wbr><q>You gotta be kidding me!</q></span>
* <abbr>PPV</abbr> PROPOSITIVE: sl
    * <span class="glend"><q>what if…</q><wbr><q>It could be that….</q><wbr><q>Consider this: …</q><wbr><q>Posit the following: …</q><wbr><q>Assume for the sake of argument that….</q></span>
* <abbr>PSC</abbr> PROSAIC: žžt
    * <span class="glend"><q>Meh... (said in disappointment)</q><wbr><q>How ordinary!</q></span>
* <abbr>PSM</abbr> PRESUMPTIVE: nnţ
    * <span class="glend"><q>It can only mean one thing…,</q><wbr><q>and that’s that!</q><wbr><q>and that’s all there is to it!</q> or <q>There’s no two ways about it,….</q></span>
* <abbr>RAC</abbr> REACTIVE: kll
    * <span class="glend"><q>My goodness!</q> <q>Wow!</q><wbr><q>Amazing!</q></span>
* <abbr>RFL</abbr> REFLECTIVE: llm
    * <span class="glend"><q>Look at it this way…</q><wbr><q>As I see it,…</q><wbr><q>In my opinion…</q><wbr><q>From my point of view…</q></span>
* <abbr>RSG</abbr> RESIGNATIVE: msf
    * <span class="glend"><q>So much for...!</q><wbr><q>There goes...!</q></span>
* <abbr>RPU</abbr> REPULSIVE: šštļ
    * <span class="glend"><q>Yuck! Ew! How gross!</q></span>
* <abbr>RVL</abbr> REVELATIVE: mmļ
    * <span class="glend"><q>No wonder…!</q> or <q>So that’s why…!</q><wbr><q>A-ha!….</q><wbr><q>Well, well, well!….</q></span>
* <abbr>SAT</abbr> SATIATIVE: <del>ļţ</del> <ins>vļ</ins>
    * <span class="glend"><q>How satisfying...!</q><wbr><q>At last, the pleasue of knowing/being/seeing/doing….</q><br>[psychological/emotional pleasure/satiety only]</span>
* <abbr>SGS</abbr> SUGGESTIVE: ltç
    * <span class="glend"><q>How about...</q><wbr><q>We could...</q><wbr><q>Might I suggest...</q></span>
* <abbr>SKP</abbr> SKEPTICAL: rnž
    * <span class="glend"><q>Yeah, right!</q><wbr><q>Oh, sure! Like anyone’s supposed to believe that!</q></span>
* <abbr>SOL</abbr> SOLICITATIVE: ňňs
    * <span class="glend"><q>please</q></span>
* <abbr>STU</abbr> STUPEFACTIVE: ļļč
    * <span class="glend"><q>Woah!</q><wbr><q>Holy, bejeezus!</q><wbr><q>What the...!</q><wbr><q>Jeez, Louise...!</q></span>
* <abbr>TRP</abbr> TREPIDATIVE: llč
    * <span class="glend"><q>Oh, God…</q><wbr><q>Oh, no!….</q><wbr><q>Oh, dear!</q><br>[fear-based]</span>
* <abbr>VEX</abbr> VEXATIVE: ksk
    * <span class="glend"><q>How annoying!</q><wbr><q>What a bother!</q><wbr><q>What a pain!</q></span>

::: warning Revisor’s Additional Info

Deprecated biases:

* Literal <abbr>LTL</abbr> is replaced by the affix <abbr>HG1/1</abbr> or <abbr>HG1/4</abbr>
* Cynical <abbr>CYN</abbr> is replaced by <abbr>IRO</abbr> or <abbr>SKP</abbr> Bias
* For expressions as <q>in a manner of speaking</q>, <q>so to speak</q>, and <q>for all intents and purposes</q>, see <abbr>HG1</abbr> and <abbr>HG2</abbr> affixes
* Ithkuil 2011’s INDIGNATIVE <abbr>IDG</abbr> usage of the non-intensive form is replaced by <abbr>SOL</abbr>

:::

## 8.6 <abbr>PSG</abbr> The Parsing Adjunct {#Sec8_6}

The parsing adjunct has already been explained in [Sec. 2.7, Paragraph No. 5](02#Sec2_7).
